Acknowledgements

The Vanderbilt University Medical Center (VUMC) Internal Medicine
Housestaff Handbook began with an Internal Medicine Resident Quality
Improvement Project which was led by Michael J. Neuss, MD, PhD, under
the guidance of Jennifer K. Green, MD, MPH in 2019.   

We would like to thank the following individuals for their contributions
to the 6th edition of the Housestaff Handbook: 

-   The many VUMC residents (past and present) who have meticulously
    authored each section of this handbook.

-   The VUMC faculty who carefully reviewed each topic for its
    accuracy.   

-   Lauren Chan MD, and Jacqueline Visina MD, the 5th edition\'s
    co-editors-in-chief, whose guidance was instrumental in the
    transition between editions. 

-   Chase Webber, DO, who was a sounding board for our new ideas
    throughout the year as the Handbook's faculty advisor. 

-   C. Beau Hilton, MD for his work in updating and improving the online
    version of this handbook. 

-   John McPherson, MD, Jane Freedman MD, Hilary Tindle MD PhD, Kristy
    Braden and Maria Kasel, for their unwavering support. 

Rationale for the Housestaff Handbook

The aim of this handbook is to provide specific, systems-based guidance
on practice at VUMC and the VA. We hope to provide readers with direct
and actionable guidance, consolidating the combined wisdom of
generations of residents and faculty experts.

The Handbook represents a coordinated effort to disseminate details of
our practice in a standardized, peer-reviewed format. The guidance
provided by the handbook makes legible evidence-based practice as well
as the oral tradition of a resident guiding an intern, or an attending a
resident. We hope that this handbook will inspire confidence and
learning, whether the reader is an intern on July 1 or a senior resident
who wishes to refresh their memory of a topic.

Disclaimers

The handbook is not a substitute for clinical judgment and is intended
as an educational guide. Content reflects current national guidelines,
as well as practice at VUMC and the Nashville VA. The handbook is not
intended to replace more comprehensive references or guides.

Images are used sparingly, but when used are either created by the
authors themselves, available by public domain or reproduced under fair
use.

Housestaff Handbook Web Version

A Digital Copy of the Commodore Compendium may be found at:
[www.vimbook.org](http://www.vimbook.org). A QR code to the online
version can be found on the back cover of the handbook. An LLM-enhanced
Chatbot version of the handbook is currently under development.

Editors-in-Chief

Kristijan Bogdanovski, MD, Julie Giannini, MD, and Spencer Lessans, MD

Resident Editors

Anesthesia: Alex Brown, MD and Camile Adajar, MD

Cardiology:  John Mitchell, MD, Emily Walsh, MD, and Nicholas Weinand,
MD

Critical Care:  Alexandra Flemington, MD

Endocrinology: Kinsley Ojukwu, MD (2023)

Gastroenterology: Katy Welp, MD

Geriatrics: Mallory Bryant, MD 

Hematology/Oncology: Thomas Gracie, MD, Matthew Lu, MD, and Alexis
Froehlich, MD

Hepatology: Ahmad Yanis, MD

Hospital Medicine: Christine Hamilton, MD

Infectious Diseases: Alexis Froehlich, MD

Nephrology: Emily Walsh, MD

Neurology: Meghan Nicholas, MD, Lauren Osborne, MD, and Eesha Oza, MD

Ophthalmology: Jonathan Barnett, MD (2023)

Outpatient Medicine: Lauren Waskowitz, MD

Palliative Care: Liana Mosley, MD

Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation: Jakob

> Dovgan, MD, Douglas Bryant, MD, William Galbraith, DO, and Nicholas
> Abramson, MD (2023)

Procedures: Rochelle Prokupets, MD 

Psychiatry: Benjamin Johnson, MD

Pulmonary: Bailey DeCoursey, MD and Justin Smith, MD

Radiology: Austin Glenn, MD, Lane Polk, MD, Kyle Maughan, MD & Nicholas
Schreiter, MD

Rheumatology: Tina Arkee, MD and Lale Ertuglu, MD 

Toxicology: John Mitchell (2023)

Faculty Reviewers

Anesthesia: Brandon Pruett, MD

Cardiology:  Lisa Mendes, MD and Jared O'Leary, MD 

Critical Care: Todd Rice, MD

Endocrinology: Laura Heller, MD

Gastroenterology: Patrick Yachimski, MD 

Geriatrics: Mariu Duggan, MD, MPH

Hematology/Oncology: Rajiv Agarwal, MD and Vivek Patel, MD

Hepatology: Manhal J. Izzy, MD

Hospital Medicine: Chase J. Webber, DO

Infectious Diseases: Milner Staub, MD, MPH and Sean Kelly, MD

Nephrology: JP Arroyo, MD, PhD,

> Edward Gould, MD, and Beatrice Concepcion, MD

Neurology: Matthew Meriweather, MD

Ophthalmology: John Bond, MD

Outpatient: Jennifer K. Green, MD, MPH

Palliative Care: Mohana Karlekar, MD

Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation: C. J. Plummer, MD

Procedures: Garren Montgomery, MD

Psychiatry: Kristopher Kast, MD and David Marcovitz, MD

Pulmonary: Meredith Pugh, MD

Radiology: Reza Imani, MD

Rheumatology: Kevin Byram, MD

Toxicology:  Rebecca E. Bruccoleri, MD and Saralyn R. Williams, MD

Table of Contents

INTRODUCTION

Acknowledgements 1

Rationale for the Handbook 1

Disclaimers 1

Authors, Editors, and Reviewers 2

ANESTHESIA AND PAIN MGMT

Acute Pain 7

Chronic Pain 7

Consulting Pain Services 8

CARDIOLOGY

Approach to the ECG 9

Bedside Echocardiography 10

Right Heart Catheterization 12

Inpt Hypertension 15

Autonomics/Orthostatic Hypotension 16

Chest Pain 17

Acute Coronary Syndromes 19

Pericarditis 21

Bradyarrhythmias 22

Tachyarrhythmias - Narrow 23

Tachyarrhythmias - Wide 25

Atrial Fibrillation and Flutter 27

Heart Failure 28

Cardiogenic Shock 32

Cardiac Devices 34

Pulmonary Embolism 36

Syncope 38

Aortic Stenosis 39

Aortic Regurgitation 41

Mitral Regurgitation 41

Mitral Stenosis 43

CRITICAL CARE

Definition of Shock 45

Management of Shock 45

Obstructive Shock 47

Sepsis 48

Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome 50

Introduction to Vent Management 51

Intubation and Extubation 53

Modes of Oxygen Delivery 55

Refractory Hypoxemia 56

Refractory Hypercapnia 58

Tracheostomy 59

ABCDEF Bundle 60

ICU Delirium 62

Brain Death 65

MICU/CCU Drips 66

Running Codes 70

Temperature Abnormalities 71

ENDOCRINOLOGY

Adrenal Incidentalomas 74

Adrenal Insufficiency 75

Central Diabetes Insipidus 75

Diabetic Ketoacidosis 76

Hyperthyroidism 77

Hypoglycemia 78

Hypothyroidism 79

Inpt Diabetes Mellitus 79

Outpt Diabetes 81

Osteoporosis 82

Outpt Medical Weight Loss 83

Panhypopituitarism 85

Severe Hypertriglyceridemia 85

Steroid Conversion 86

Stress Dose Steroids 86

Thyroid Nodules 87

Thyroid Storm 87

GASTROENTEROLOGY

Acute Abdominal Pain 89

Acute Diverticulitis 96

Acute Pancreatitis 97

Chronic Pancreatitis 98

Anorectal Disease 99

Biliary Disease 100

Clostridioides Difficile Infections 102

Constipation 104

Diarrhea 105

Dysphagia 107

Odynophagia 108

Gastroparesis 109

Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease 110

Eosinophilic Esophagitis 111

Peptic Ulcer Disease 111

GI Bleeding 113

Ileus 114

Inflammatory Bowel Disease 115

Intestinal Ischemia 117

Irritable Bowel Syndrome 119

Large Bowel Obstruction 120

Small Bowel Obstruction 121

Nausea & Vomiting 122

Ostomy Complications 123

GERIATRICS

Functional Status 125

Dementia 125

Falls 128

Frailty and Malnutrition 129

Medication Management 130

Urinary Incontinence & Foleys 131

Medicare 134

Immunization/Screening 135

Home Safety 137

Driving Cessation 138

HEMATOLOGY/ONCOLOGY

Anemia 139

Neutropenia & Neutropenic Fever 142

Thrombocytopenia 144

Pancytopenia 146

Leukocytosis 147

Venous Thromboembolism 148

Anticoagulation 149

Hypercoagulable States 151

Coagulopathies 155

DIC 157

Transfusion Medicine 157

Sickle Cell Crisis 160

Lymphoma 161

Myelodysplastic Syndromes 162

Acute Leukemia 163

Plasma Cell Dyscrasias 165

Myeloproliferative Neoplasms 168

Bone Marrow Transplant 170

CAR T-cell Therapy 172

Oncologic Emergencies 173

Paraneoplastic Syndromes 177

Cancer of Unknown Primary 178

Therapy Toxicities 180

Indications for Inpt Rad Onc Consult 181

Radiation Toxicity 183

HEPATOLOGY

Cirrhosis Overview 185

Liver Transplant Workup 186

Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis 188

GE Varices and Hemorrhage 189

Ascites and Hepatic Hydrothorax 191

Hepatic Encephalopathy 192

AKI and Hepatorenal Syndrome 193

Hyponatremia in Cirrhosis 194

TIPS 195

Hepatocellular Carcinoma 196

Coagulopathy in Cirrhosis 197

Portal Vein Thrombosis 198

Alcohol-Associated Hepatitis 199

MASH and MASLD 200

Acute Liver Injury and Failure 201

Non-Invasive Testing 206

HOSPITAL MEDICINE

Lines and Catheters 207

Telemetry 208

High Quality Handovers 209

Discharge Planning 209

AMA Discharges 211

Wounds 211

Enteral Nutrition 213

Guidelines for Pregnant Patients 215

INFECTIOUS DISEASES

General Tips 217

Bacteremia 217

Central Nervous System Infection 219

Diabetic Foot Infection 221

Endocarditis 223

Fever in a Return Traveler 225

Fungal Infections 226

Genitourinary Infection 229

GI Infections 231

HIV/AIDS and ART 233

AIDS Defining Clinical Conditions 234

Overview of Antiretroviral Therapy 238

Antimicrobial Prophylaxis per CD4 240

Immune Reconstitution Inflam Synd 241

Joint Infections and Osteomyelitis 242

Odontogenic Infections 243

Pulmonary Infections 243

Inpt COVID-19 Mgmt 247

MTB and NTM Infections 249

Sexually Transmitted Infections 252

Skin and Soft Tissue Infection 256

NEPHROLOGY

Acute Kidney Injury 259

Contrast Induced AKI 261

Approach to CKD 262

Renal Replacement Therapy 265

Peritoneal Dialysis Peritonitis 266

IV Fluids 267

Acid-Base 268

Electrolytes 270

Approach to Urinalysis 279

Hematuria 281

Kidney Transplant 282

NEUROLOGY

Common Neurological Problems 287

Altered Mental Status 288

ALS 289

Brain Masses 290

Inpt Headache 291

Outpt Headache 291

Multiple Sclerosis 292

NMO 293

Neuropathy 293

Parkinson\'s Disease 294

Seizures without Status Epilepticus 295

Vertigo 297

Elevated ICP and Hydrocephalus 298

Guillain-Barre Syndrome 299

Myasthenia Gravis & Lambert Eaton 299

Status Epilepticus 300

Stroke 301

Stroke Alert 303

OPHTHALMOLOGY

Common Ophtho Abbreviations 304

Taking a Good Ocular History 304

Approach to Blurry Vision 305

Approach to Double Vision 306

Approach to Flashes, Floaters, Spots 306

Approach to Red Eye 307

Anisocoria 307

Conjunctivitis 308

Cataracts 309

Corneal Abrasion, Ulceration 309

Dry Eye 310

Fungemia and Intraocular Involvement 310

Glaucoma 311

Optic Neuritis 312

Orbital and Preseptal Cellulitis 313

Papilledema 314

Retinal Detachment 314

Uveitis 315

Wilson's Disease 315

OUTPATIENT MEDICINE

Allergy 317

Anxiety/Depression 318

Asthma 320

Dermatology 323

Fatigue 328

Gender-Affirming Care 329

Hypertension 332

Immunizations 336

Lipids 338

Obesity/Nutrition 340

Preventative Medicine/Screening 342

PALLIATIVE CARE

Code Status Discussion 346

Videos for Difficult Conversations 347

Prognosis 348

Acute and Chronic Pain 349

Imminently Dying: Med Mgmt 350

Opioids: Principles & Conversions 352

Pt Controlled Analgesia (PCA) 353\
Hospice 355

The Death Pronouncement 356

Advanced Directives 358

PHYSICAL MEDICINE & REHAB

Reasons for PM&R Consultation 360

Rehabilitation Options 360

Rehab Terms 361

Spinal Cord Injury 362

Spasticity 363

Traumatic Brain Injury 364

MSK Injuries 364

Acute Back Pain 365

Knee Pain 366

Neck Pain 369

Shoulder Pain 370

PROCEDURES

Consent 373

Anticoagulation 373

Anesthesia and Sedation 373

Arterial line 374

Central line 374

Lumbar Puncture 376

Dobhoff Tube 377

Paracentesis 378

Thoracentesis 379

Ultrasound-guided PIV 380

Post-Procedural Care 381

PSYCHIATRY

Medical Decision-Making Capacity 384

Medical Holds 384

Navigating \"Difficult\" Pt Interactions 385

Agitation Management 386

Delirium 388

Inpt Insomnia 389

Substance Use Disorder 390

Alcohol Use Disorder 391

Opioid Use Disorder 394

Tobacco Use Disorder 396

Motivational Interviewing 397

PULMONARY

Basics of Blood Gases 398

Hypoxia 398

Pulmonary Function Tests 399

Acute Asthma Exacerbation 400

COPD Exacerbation 402

Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Exacerbation 403

Hemoptysis 404

Interstitial Lung Disease 405

Lung Masses 408

Lung Nodule 409

Pleural Effusions 411

Pulmonary Hypertension 412

Airway Clearance Therapy 415

Chest Tubes 416

Home Oxygen Therapies 417

Inhaler Therapy 418

RADIOLOGY

Radiology Exams by Diagnosis 421

Abdominal X-ray Interpretation 422

Abdomen/Pelvis CT Interpretation 424

GI Fluoroscopy 427

Chest X-ray Interpretation 427

Non-Con Head CT Interpretation 429

Consults for Radiographic Procedures 433

Anticoagulation for IR Procedures 434

Contrast Allergies 437

RHEUMATOLOGY

Approach to Joint Pain 438

Arthrocentesis 439

Biologics Overview 440

Rheumatology Lab Testing 443

Ankylosing Spondylitis 445

Crystalline Arthropathies 446

Pseudogout 447

Inflammatory Myopathies 448

Psoriatic Arthritis 449

Rheumatoid Arthritis 450

Sarcoidosis 451

Scleroderma 452

Systemic Lupus Erythematous (SLE) 454

Vasculitis 455

TOXICOLOGY

Toxidrome Overview 460

Management of Specific Overdoses 461

Drug Induced QTc Prolongation 466

Brown Recluse Bites (Loxoscelism) 467

APPENDICES

Uploading Records 469

VUMC Rotations 469

VA Rotations 472

Discharges at VUMC 473

Discharges at VA 474

Door Codes & U/S Locations 475

VUMC Phone Numbers 476

VA Phone Numbers 477

*\
*

Anesthesia & Pain Management

Editors: Camille Adajar, MD and Frances Alexandra Brown, MD

Faculty Editor: Brandon Pruett, MD

Acute Pain

Multimodal pain regimen suggestions

-   Tylenol

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dose: 1,000mg PO Q8H (can reduce to 650 based on age or
    comorbidities)

-   Indications: Analgesic and antipyretic

-   Contraindications: Cirrhosis -- limit to 2000mg daily

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gabapentin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dose: 300mg PO Q8H (reduce to 100mg, Q12H dosing, or hold based on
    renal function, age, or sedation level)

-   Indications: Neuropathic pain

-   Contraindications: decreased CrCl

-   Side effects: sedation, respiratory depression

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Robaxin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dose: 500mg PO Q8H

-   Indication: muscle relaxant

-   Contraindication: IV formulation has preservative that is
    nephrotoxic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NSAIDs (check for adequate renal function and GI contraindications)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Toradol 15-30mg IV Q6H x 5 days

-   Ibuprofen 600mg Q6H

-   Indications: analgesic, anti-inflammatory, antipyretic

-   Contraindications: CKD/AKI, ulcers, GI bleed

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Thoracic epidural catheter (TEC) - These are done and managed by the
    Acute Pain Service. With any issues or concerns, APS needs to be
    contacted.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indications: pain relief in thoracic dermatome distributions (rib
    fractures, BOLTs, etc.)

-   Contraindications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Low platelets/INR \> 1.5/coagulopathy

-   Hypotension

-   Positive blood cultures, fever, white count, etc.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TECs stay in 5-7 days, risk of infection increases beyond that
    point.

-   TECs run an infusion of Ropivacaine and Hydromorphone in the
    epidural space

-   Do NOT need to d/c anticoagulation to pull TEC

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pt can only be on 5000 units of Subq heparin

-   Pain service can pull TEC 4hrs after last SQH dose

-   They cannot be on the weight adjusted 7500 units

-   No Lovenox/Enoxaparin while TEC in place

Chronic Pain

-   Suboxone/Buprenorphine management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can restart home regimen if they have taken their suboxone in the
    last 48 hours

-   Look at CSMD on EPIC to verify their home regimen

-   If re-initiation is needed, consult addiction psych

-   Important for patients taking suboxone to remain on the medication

-   If pain is an issue, continue their medication and consult either
    chronic pain or acute pain service and addiction psych

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Methadone management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Patients need to be evaluated by addiction psychology service for
    methadone recommendations while inpatient (often requires QTc
    monitoring)

-   Patients should be continued on home regimen

Consulting Pain Services

-   Consulting Acute Pain Service (APS)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If refractory to multimodal pain regimen above, consider consulting
    APS for:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute pain due to surgery in the last 7-10 days

-   Acute pain due to new trauma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   APS also provides services for patients who are receiving regional
    anesthetic (nerve blocks, nerve catheters) techniques

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consulting Perioperative Consult Service

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Periop provides pain management and implements enhanced recovery
    after surgery (ERAS) for specific surgical patients on the ERAS
    pathway

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consulting Chronic Pain Service (CPS)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Service for patients with chronic pain and cancer-related pain

-   If a patient is having an acute flare of a chronic problem that is
    not related to surgery or trauma, consult CPS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Examples: IBD flare, chronic pancreatitis, sickle cell pain crisis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consultation available Monday through Friday 7am-3pm

-   The Transitional Pain Service (TPS) is a division of CPS: evaluate
    chronic pain patients preoperatively in clinic or before hospital
    discharge for outpatient pain management recommendations after
    surgery

Cardiology

Editor:  John Mitchell, MD, Emily Walsh, MD, and Nicholas Weinand, MD

Faculty Editor: Lisa Mendes, MD, and Jared O'Leary, MD

Diagnostic Cardiac Tests

Approach to the ECG -- Melis Sahinoz

Method = mastery, approach each EKG the same

Rate

-   Regular rhythms = "Rule of 300" = 300 ÷ (large boxes between QRS
    complexes)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   1 box = 300 bpm, 2 boxes = 150 bpm, 3 boxes = 100 bpm, 4 boxes = 75
    bpm, 5 boxes = 60 bpm, 6 boxes = 50 bpm

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Irregular rhythms or severe bradycardia = (total number of QRS
    complexes on ECG) x 6

    Rhythm

-   Determine regular vs irregular: calipers or march out QRS complexes
    on paper

-   Criteria for Sinus rhythm: P before every QRS; Upright P in Lead I,
    II; Negative in aVR

    Axis

-   Normal: - 30^o^ to + 90^o^

-   Quick method: Leads I and II

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Normal Axis: Upright in I and II

-   Left Axis Deviation: Upright in I, down in II

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Causes: LVH, LBBB, Left anterior fascicular block, prior inferior MI

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Right Axis Deviation: Down in I, up in II

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Causes: RVH, RBBB, Left posterior fascicular block, prior lateral
    MI, PE

    Intervals

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PR Interval: normal 120 -- 200 ms

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If \< 120 ms, consider pre-excitation with accessory pathway (i.e.
    WPW)

-   If \> 200 ms, first degree AV block

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   QRS Complex: 60 -- 100 ms (normal)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   100-120 ms: Incomplete BBB or non-specific intraventricular
    conduction delay (IVCD)

-   \> 120ms: complete BBB, ventricular tachycardia, hyperkalemia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   QT interval: Normal duration \< 450ms in men and \< 460ms in women

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   QT is inversely proportional to HR (QT interval shortens at faster
    HRs)

-   Quick estimate: normal QT is less than half the preceding RR
    interval

-   QTc estimates the QT interval at a HR of 60 bpm (to allow for
    comparison across HRs)

-   A couple of formulas exist to calculate QTc:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   QTcB= most commonly used due to simplicity, most accurate HR of 60

-   QTcF= more accurate when HR is outside the range of 60-100

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Clinically significant when generally QTc \> 500 ms

-   Causes of Prolonged QTc: hereditary, medication-induced
    (anti-emetics, ABX, psychiatric meds), hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia,
    hypocalcemia, ischemia

    Morphology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   P wave: P waves in limb leads should be ≤2.5 small box high and ≤2.5
    small box wide

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Right Atrial Enlargement: Peaked P Wave in Lead II that measures
    \>2.5mm

-   Left Atrial Enlargement

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lead II: Bifid P Wave (two humps) with total duration \> 110 ms

-   Lead V1: Biphasic P wave, terminal deflection \> 1mm wide and deep

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If ≥ 3 different P wave morphologies in same lead: wandering atrial
    pacemaker (HR \< 100) or multifocal atrial tachycardia (HR \> 100)

    QRS complex

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Voltage

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Low voltage: QRS amplitude \< 5mm in limb leads or \< 10mm in
    precordial

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Causes: pericardial effusion, infiltrative cardiomyopathy, obesity

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Right Ventricular Hypertrophy: Tall R Waves in V1 (\> 7mm) and right
    axis deviation

-   Left Ventricular Hypertrophy: multiple criteria exist

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sokolow-Lyon criteria is a common example: S in V1 + R in V5 or V6
    \>35mm, R in aVL [\>]{.underline}1.1 mV

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Conduction delays

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   RBBB: Wide QRS and RSR' in V1 or V2; deep broad S In lateral leads

-   LBBB: Wide QRS, large S in V1, broad monophasic R wave in lateral
    leads (I, aVL, V6)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   R wave progression

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   R wave normally gets progressively larger from V1 to V6

-   If the transition does not occur by V4, this is called \"poor R wave
    progression\". This is seen in chronic lung disease, LVH, left
    anterior fascicular block, and anterior MI

    Q-wave: Small Q waves are normal in most leads

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Never normal in V1-V3

-   Pathologic Q waves: \> 1 box wide and 2 boxes deep or \> 25% height
    of R wave

    ST Segment

-   ST Elevation: STEMI, LBBB (ST elevation in leads with deep S waves),
    LVH, Ventricular paced rhythm, Pericarditis (associated with PR
    depression), coronary vasospasm, Brugada syndrome

-   ST Depression: ischemia, reciprocal change in STEMI, posterior
    myocardial infarction (V1-V3), digoxin, hypokalemia

-   See ACS section for STEMI criteria, Wellens Syndrome

    T wave:

-   Normal T waves are upright in all leads except aVR and V1

-   Inverted T Waves

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute ischemia (if present in contiguous leads), LBBB (in lateral
    leads), RBBB (V1-V3), LVH ('strain' pattern similar to LBBB), RVH
    (RV 'strain' in V1-V3 or inferior leads), PE (right heart strain or
    part of S1,Q3,T3), intracranial pathology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Peaked T Waves

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hyperkalemia vs 'hyperacute' T waves that precede ST elevation and Q
    waves in STEMI

Bedside Echocardiography -- Jamie Pfaff

Finding an Ultrasound

-   MICU: radiology room behind charge nurse's desk in middle hallway

-   VA ICU: In front of resident workspace

-   8N: Behind nurses\' station before entering cleaning supply room

-   8S: In supply closet to left as your walk toward nursing station -
    (door code is 1-3-5)

-   6MCE: COVID restricted (ask nurses)

-   CCU/5N only: supply room on left as entering CCU

-   Round wing: 5th floor, ask nurses

-   TTE Standard Views

![A picture containing text Description automatically
generated](media/image1.png){width="1.1222222222222222in"
height="0.9048611111111111in"}![](media/image2.png){width="1.1472222222222221in"
height="0.9in"}Parasternal long

-   Probe position: Rotate probe 180 degrees with right edge of
    probe/probe marker pointing toward pt's left shoulder

-   Make sure probe is centered over mitral valve (In right spot if you
    can see MV and AV)

    E Point Septal Separation (EPSS)

-   Distance separating the anterior MV leaflet from the septal wall as
    measure of LV systolic function (easy evaluation of systolic
    function)

-   Place M mode spike at tip of mitral leaflet and hit M mode
    (perpendicular to septum)

-   Identify E point (passive filling of LV) and determine distance from
    interventricular septum (IVS)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \<7mm = Normal

-   \>10mm = HF

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Confounders that elevate EPSS: AR, MS

![Introduction to Focused Cardiac Ultrasound: The Parasternal Long Axis
View - Renal Fellow
Network](media/image3.png){width="1.1979166666666667in"
height="0.9583333333333334in"} Parasternal short

-   Probe position: Rotate probe 180 degrees with right edge of
    probe/probe marker pointing toward pt's left shoulder

-   Good position to assess EF by visualizing wall thickening

![Introduction to Focused Cardiac Ultrasound: The Parasternal Long Axis
View - Renal Fellow Network](media/image4.png){width="1.3125in"
height="1.0520833333333333in"} Apical four chamber

-   Probe position: Slide down and look near pt's left nipple (or in the
    intermammary fold after lifting up breast tissue if needed - at PMI
    if able to palpate)

-   Good to assess EF by visualizing cardiac shortening

    ![Introduction to Focused Cardiac Ultrasound: The Parasternal Long
    Axis View - Renal Fellow
    Network](media/image5.jpeg){width="1.2506944444444446in"
    height="0.9375in"}Subxiphoid

-   Probe position: Push probe head into pt's abdomen just below xiphoid
    and flatten probe to make nearly parallel to pt's position, marker
    to pt's left

-   Troubleshooting: shift probe slightly left of midline (toward pt's
    right) and angle toward heart/right to use liver as acoustic window
    or ask pt to take big breath (moves heart closer to probe)

-   Best window to visualize pericardial effusion

    ![Subcostal Window \| Sonography
    Resources](media/image6.jpeg){width="1.10625in"
    height="1.0541666666666667in"}IVC

-   Probe position: subxiphoid area with probe marker facing toward pt's
    head tilted slightly left of midline, trace IVC into RA to verify
    correct vessel (vs aorta)

-   IVC size and collapsibility used as a surrogate for CVP and RAP

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \<2.1cm and \>50% collapse🡪RAP \~3 mmHg

-   \<2.1cm and \< 50% collapse or \>2.1cm and \>50% collapse🡪RAP \~8
    mmHg

-   \>2.1cm, \<50% collapse🡪 RAP \~ \>15 mmHg

    Resources:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   https://www.coreultrasound.com/basic-cardiac-function/

-   http://pie.med.utoronto.ca/tte/?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=r360&utm_campaign=cardiology

-   https://www.echocardiographer.org/TTE.html?utm_medium=referral&utm_source=r360&utm_campaign=cardiology

-   App: FATE CARD (Focus Assessed Transthoracic Echocardiography

Right Heart Catheterization -- Ahmad Yanis

Pulmonary artery catheter (PAC): Multilumen catheter that sits in the
right heart to provide invasive measurement of hemodynamic parameters

Indications for PAC placement

-   Diagnose undifferentiated shock

-   Severe cardiogenic shock

-   Diagnose pulmonary hypertension

-   Diagnose left -\> right shunting

-   Diagnose valvular and pericardial disease

-   Titrating medications, specifically inotropes, pulmonary
    vasodilators, diuresis

    Contraindications to PAC placement

-   Infection at the insertion site

-   RA/RV mass or thrombi

-   Tricuspid or pulmonic valve endocarditis

-   Mechanical tricuspid or pulmonic valves

-   Presence of RV assist device

    Complications of PAC placement

-   Arrythmias: VT, RBBB, 3rd degree AV block if preexisting LBBB

-   Infection (endocarditis of the pulmonary valve)

-   Bleeding

-   Pulmonary embolism and pulmonary Infarct

-   Pneumothorax

-   Air embolism

-   Pulmonary artery perforation / rupture

-   Endocardial/valvular damage

PAC Pressure Tracings

![Diagram Description automatically
generated](media/image7.png){width="2.1078423009623797in"
height="1.3756397637795275in"}

+--------------+-------------------+----------+----------------------+
|              | Definition        | Normal   | > Interpretation     |
|              |                   | \"Rule   |                      |
|              |                   | of 5s\"  |                      |
+==============+===================+==========+======================+
| Central      | Pressure in       | 0 - 5    | Elevated CVP:        |
| Venous       | superior vena     | mmHg     | cardiac dysfunction  |
| Pressure     | cava, often an    |          | and/or hypervolemia  |
|              | indicator of      |          |                      |
| (CVP)        | volume status     |          | Low CVP: volume      |
|              |                   |          | depletion or         |
|              |                   |          | decreased venous     |
|              |                   |          | tone                 |
+--------------+-------------------+----------+----------------------+
| Right Atrial | Surrogate for     | 0 - 5    | Elevated RAP:        |
| Pressure     | preload, should   | mmHg     | disruption in        |
| (RAP)        | be same as CVP    |          | forward cardiac flow |
|              |                   |          | or hypervolemia      |
+--------------+-------------------+----------+----------------------+
| Right        | Right ventricular | 25/5     | Elevated RVP\*\*:    |
| Ventricle    | systolic\* and    | mmHg     |                      |
| Pressure     | end diastolic     |          | -PA/PV disorder:     |
|              | pressures         |          | pulm HTN, PV         |
|              |                   |          | stenosis, PE         |
|              |                   |          |                      |
|              |                   |          | -RV disorder: CM,    |
|              |                   |          | tamponade, ischemia/ |
|              |                   |          | infarction           |
+--------------+-------------------+----------+----------------------+
| Pulmonary    | Measured as       | 25/10    | Elevated PAP:        |
| Artery       | systolic,         | mmHg     |                      |
| Pressure     | diastolic, and    |          | -Acute: PE,          |
| (PAP)        | mean pressures.   | Mean: 15 | hypoxemia induced    |
|              | Diagnoses pHTN.   | mmHg     | pulmonary            |
|              |                   |          | vasoconstriction     |
|              |                   |          |                      |
|              |                   |          | -Chronic: PH groups  |
|              |                   |          | 1-5                  |
+--------------+-------------------+----------+----------------------+
| Pulmonary    | Surrogate for     | 10 mmHg  | Elevated PAWP        |
| Artery Wedge | left atrial       |          | (LVEDP): LVHF,       |
| Pressure     | pressures and     |          | mitral and aortic    |
| (PAWP or     | LVEDP             |          | valve disorders,     |
| wedge)       |                   |          | hypervolemia, R to L |
|              |                   |          | shunts,              |
|              |                   |          | constrictive/        |
|              |                   |          | restrictive CM, HOCM |
+--------------+-------------------+----------+----------------------+
| Th           | Amount of blood   | CO:      | Low CI:              |
| ermodilution | pumped in one     | 3.4-15   | systolic/diastolic   |
| Cardiac      | min. CI is the    | L/min    | heart failure,       |
| Output &     | cardiac output    |          | severe valvular      |
| Index        | divided by body   | CI:      | disorder (MR, AS),   |
|              | surface area (to  | 2.8-4.2  | RV failure, pHTN,    |
|              | standardize for   | L/       | cardiogenic shock.   |
|              | body size)        | min/m\^2 |                      |
|              |                   |          | Elevated CI          |
|              |                   |          | (high-output state): |
|              |                   |          | sepsis, anemia,      |
|              |                   |          | thyrotoxicosis, A-V  |
|              |                   |          | shunt                |
+--------------+-------------------+----------+----------------------+
| Mixed        | \% of oxygen      | 65-70%   | High SvO2 (\> 65%):  |
| central      | bound to Hgb in   |          |                      |
| venous       | blood returning   |          | -Decreased O2 demand |
| o            | to the right side |          |                      |
| xyhemoglobin | of the heart,     |          | -High flow states    |
|              | reflects total    |          | seen in distributive |
| saturation   | body O2           |          | shock (sepsis)       |
| (SvO2)       | extraction        |          |                      |
|              |                   |          | Low SvO2 (\< 50%):   |
|              |                   |          | decreased O2         |
|              |                   |          | delivery seen in     |
|              |                   |          | cardiogenic or       |
|              |                   |          | hypovolemic shock    |
+--------------+-------------------+----------+----------------------+
| \* RVSP can  |                   |          |                      |
| be a         |                   |          |                      |
| surrogate    |                   |          |                      |
| for PASP     |                   |          |                      |
|              |                   |          |                      |
| \*\*Severe   |                   |          |                      |
| RVP          |                   |          |                      |
| elevations   |                   |          |                      |
| are          |                   |          |                      |
| generally    |                   |          |                      |
| chronic      |                   |          |                      |
| while acute  |                   |          |                      |
| conditions   |                   |          |                      |
| typically    |                   |          |                      |
| have RVSP    |                   |          |                      |
| \<40-50      |                   |          |                      |
+--------------+-------------------+----------+----------------------+

Calculating Hemodynamic Parameters from PAC Pressures

+--------------+---------------------+-------------+------------------+
|              | Definition          | Normal      | Interpretation   |
|              |                     | Values      |                  |
+==============+=====================+=============+==================+
| Fick CO and  | Calculated CO based | 4-7 L/min   | See \"Cardiac    |
| CI           | on Oxygen           |             | Index\" above.   |
|              | consumption (VO2),  | 2.5-4       |                  |
|              | Hbg, and O2 sats of | L/min/m^2^  |                  |
|              | arterial and venous |             |                  |
|              | blood               |             |                  |
+--------------+---------------------+-------------+------------------+
| Systemic     | Measurement of      | 700-1200    | Elevated SVR:    |
| Vascular     | afterload; helpful  | dynes       | hypovolemic,     |
| Resistance   | in delineating the  | \*s\*cm^-5^ | cardiogenic, and |
| (SVR)        | etiology of shock   |             | obstructive      |
|              | as well as guiding  |             | shock            |
|              | afterload-reduction |             |                  |
|              | therapy in HFrEF    |             | Decreased SVR:   |
|              |                     |             | distributive     |
|              |                     |             | shock (sepsis,   |
|              |                     |             | anaphylaxis,     |
|              |                     |             | neurogenic)      |
+--------------+---------------------+-------------+------------------+
| Tr           | Differentiates      | \< 12 mmHg  | A TPG value      |
| anspulmonary | between pre- and    |             | greater than 12  |
| gradient     | post-capillary      |             | mmHg indicates   |
| (TPG)        | pulmonary           |             | that a component |
|              | hypertension.       |             | of the pHTN is   |
|              |                     |             | secondary to     |
|              |                     |             | pulmonary        |
|              |                     |             | vascular disease |
+--------------+---------------------+-------------+------------------+
| Pulmonary    | Gold standard in    | \< 3 Wood   | Elevated PVR     |
| Vascular     | the estimation of   | Units       | (\>3 Wood units) |
| Resistance   | the severity of     |             | suggests         |
| (PVR)        | pre-capillary pHTN\ | 30-90       | pre-capillary    |
|              | \                   | dynes\      | pHTN             |
|              | Reflects the        | *sec\*cm^5^ |                  |
|              | pressure drop       |             | Normal PVR seen  |
|              | across the          |             | in pulmonary     |
|              | pulmonary system    |             | venous           |
|              | only and is         |             | hypertension     |
|              | independent of the  |             | (diastolic       |
|              | LA, mitral valve    |             | dysfunction)     |
|              | and the LV          |             |                  |
+--------------+---------------------+-------------+------------------+
| Pulmonary    | Pulmonary pulse     | \> 0.9      | PAPi \< 0.9      |
| artery       | pressure relative   |             | predicts         |
| pulsatility  | to preload (RAP),   |             | in-hospital      |
| index (PAPi) | Indicator of RV     |             | mortality and/or |
|              | function            |             | need for RVAD in |
|              |                     |             | acute MI. Can be |
|              |                     |             | decreased in     |
|              |                     |             | pure RV failure  |
|              |                     |             | or biventricular |
|              |                     |             | failure          |
+--------------+---------------------+-------------+------------------+
| Cardiac      | Cardiac output      | Normal \> 1 | CP\< 0.6         |
| Power        | relative to         |             | strongly         |
|              | afterload, a        |             | suggestive of LV |
|              | measure of LV       |             | failure          |
|              | contractile reserve |             |                  |
|              |                     |             | Found to be a    |
|              |                     |             | strong           |
|              |                     |             | independent      |
|              |                     |             | hemodynamic      |
|              |                     |             | correlate in pts |
|              |                     |             | with cardiogenic |
|              |                     |             | shock. Predictor |
|              |                     |             | of mortality in  |
|              |                     |             | CCU              |
+--------------+---------------------+-------------+------------------+

Blood Pressure

Inpatient Hypertension -- Nicholas Weinand

Background

-   Hypertensive urgency: SBP \> 180 mmHg/DBP \> 120 mmHg

-   Hypertensive emergency: SBP \> 180 mmHg/DBP \> 120 mmHg + end organ
    damage

    Evaluation

-   Are there signs/symptoms of end organ damage?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Neurologic symptoms: agitation, delirium, stupor, seizures, visual
    disturbances

-   Focal neurologic deficits

-   Chest pain

-   Back pain (consider aortic dissection)

-   Dyspnea (consider pulmonary edema)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   BMP, LFTs, Troponin, BNP: Lab findings suggestive of end-organ
    damage

    Management

-   Goal is to lower BP back to normal over 24-48h

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Initial lowering should be 10-20% in minutes if HTN emergency; goal
    should be 10-20% in 2-4 hours if HTN urgency

-   Typically aim for initial goal BP near 160/110

-   Exceptions to gradual lowering include:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute stroke: call code stroke, lower ONLY if BP \> 185/110 in pts
    under consideration for reperfusion therapy; or BP \> 220/120 in pts
    not candidates for reperfusion therapy

-   Aortic dissection: Goal = rapidly lower BP in minutes to target of
    100-120 systolic to avoid aortic shearing forces

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pharmacologic therapy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ensure their home medicines have been restarted at appropriate
    doses, formulation (long acting vs. short), and dosing intervals

-   If pt has a rapid acting anti-HTN med, can consider giving a dose
    early or an "extra dose" and then up titrating their overall daily
    dose

-   Rescue therapies:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Captopril PO (12.5mg or 25mg dosed Q8H; conversion ratio of
    captopril:lisinopril = 5:1)

-   Hydralazine PO (10-20mg initial dosing Q6H)

-   Isosorbide dinitrate PO (5-20mg TID)

-   Nifedipine XL PO (dose at 30mg initially, max 90mg BID; NOT
    sublingual)

-   Labetalol IV (10-40mg initially; dosed up to every 20-30mins)

-   Hydralazine IV (10-20mg initially; dosed up to every 30 mins).

-   Nitroglycerin Infusion

-   Nitropaste 1" (can add/wipe away for titration; dose Q6H until oral
    meds can be started for better long-acting control)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dialysis if missed session

    Additional Information

-   Refractory HTN: try additional agents listed above vs. escalation of
    care for drip (nicardipine, nitroglycerin, nitroprusside, esmolol).
    Consider secondary workup (urine metanephrines, renal vascular US)

-   Most drips that can be done for this indication are done in stepdown
    and usually require no-titration of the infusion and occasionally
    the MD to be bedside to initiate the infusion.

-   This includes diltiazem, labetalol, nitroglycerin, and verapamil
    drips. Nicardipine, esmolol, and nitroprusside infusions (ggt) are
    not allowed on step down.

Autonomics and Orthostatic Hypotension -- Emily Walsh

Background

-   Orthostatic Hypotension (OH): SBP ↓ \> 20 mmHg, DBP ↓ \> 10 mmHg),
    or HR Increase \> 30 within 3 min of standing up or head-up tilt to
    60% on a tilt table

-   Etiologies: Neurogenic OH (nOH) vs non-neurogenic OH

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   nOH associated with autonomic failure

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Blunted tachycardia during hypotension characteristic of autonomic
    failure

-   nOH: If HR rise is \<15

-   nOH also associated with periods of high BP (supine hypertension)

-   Ex: Neurodegenerative disease, neuropathy (diabetes, amyloid,
    paraneoplastic, etc)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other causes: volume depletion (most common), medications
    (diuretics, alpha-1 blockers, BB, etc), pump failure (severe AS,
    arrhythmia)

    Evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Orthostatic vitals signs (checking supine, sitting, and standing
    with 5-minute wait in each position)

-   Volume status exam

-   Labs: CBC, CMP, EKG, TSH, B12, LFTs,

-   Consider SPEP/UPEP, paraneoplastic panel, autonomic function testing
    depending on clinical context

    Management

-   Conservative:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TED hose and abdominal binder for ambulation

-   Drink 16oz of fluid 15 min prior to standing

-   If they have supine HTN, keep HOB 30-45 degrees at all times

-   Add 2.3-4.6g of salt per day to diet (if no contraindications)

-   Avoid high temperatures (which cause peripheral vasodilation)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pharmacologic therapies (see table):

+-------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+
| Drug        | Dose          | Mech             | Side effects       |
+=============+===============+==================+====================+
| Flud        | 0.1mg QD      | M                | Edema, HTN, hypoK  |
| rocortisone |               | ineralocorticoid |                    |
| (Florinef)  | ↑ by 0.1 mg   | → increase blood | Do not use in CHF  |
|             |               | volume. Enhances |                    |
|             | Max: 0.3 mg   | sensitivity to   |                    |
|             | QD            | circulating      |                    |
|             |               | catecholamines   |                    |
+-------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+
| Midodrine   | 2.5mg TID     | Peri             | Supine HTN         |
|             |               | pheral-selective |                    |
|             | ↑ by 2.5mg    | α1 agonist →     | Pilomotor          |
|             |               | constricts both  | reactions          |
|             | Up to 10mg    | aa & vv          |                    |
|             | TID           |                  | Pruritus           |
|             |               |                  |                    |
|             |               |                  | GI sx              |
|             |               |                  |                    |
|             |               |                  | Avoid              |
|             |               |                  | w/uncontrolled     |
|             |               |                  | HTN, urinary       |
|             |               |                  | retention, heart   |
|             |               |                  | dz                 |
+-------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+
| Droxidopa   | 100mg         | NE precursor →   | Supine HTN, less   |
|             |               | carboxylated to  | than midodrine     |
|             | ↑ by 100mg    | NE. Can cross    |                    |
|             |               | BBB.             |                    |
|             | Max: 600mg    |                  |                    |
|             | TID           |                  |                    |
+-------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+
| Atomoxetine | 10mg or 18mg  | SNRI             | Do not use w/      |
|             |               |                  | glaucoma or MAOI   |
+-------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+

Supine HTN treatments: transdermal nitroglycerin (preferred); minoxidil,
hydralazine, or clonidine in select pts

Chest Pain -- Claire Lo

Chest Pain / Angina:

-   Symptoms determine likelihood that chest pain has a cardiac etiology

-   Cardiac \> possible cardiac \> noncardiac is more useful than
    typical vs atypical angina

![angina characteristics](media/image8.png){width="2.9462653105861767in"
height="1.175in"}

Diagnoses Not to Miss: "The Serious Six" (3 Heart, 2 Lung, 1 Esophagus)

-   Acute Coronary Syndrome - Pneumothorax

-   Aortic Dissection/Aneurysm - Pulmonary embolism

-   Cardiac Tamponade - Mediastinitis (e.g. esophageal\
    perforation)

    Other Differential Diagnoses

-   **Skin/subcutaneous**: Laceration, herpes zoster, cellulitis,
    abscess

-   **Musculoskeletal**: Costochondritis, rib fracture, myositis,
    sprain/strain

-   **Pleural space** (no pain receptors in the lung): PNA, tumor,
    pleuritis

-   **Heart**: Myocarditis, pericarditis, spontaneous coronary artery
    dissection (SCAD), coronary vasospasm, aortic stenosis,
    stress-induced cardiomyopathy (Takotsubo), decompensated heart
    failure

-   **GI**: GERD, esophagitis, rupture, impaction, diaphragmatic hernia

-   **Trachea**: Tracheitis, tracheal tear

-   **Nervous system**: thoracic radiculopathy

    Physical Exam

-   Vitals: BP in both arms (do while interviewing - quick, easy,
    inexpensive)

-   Hemodynamic profile: warm/dry, warm/wet, cold/dry, cold/wet

-   Palpate chest: evaluate costochondral junction, subcutaneous
    emphysema, examine skin

-   Cardiac: murmurs, rub for pericarditis, JVD for heart failure or PE
    with RV strain

-   Pulm: absent breath sounds for PTX, crackles for left heart failure,
    PNA

-   Abdomen: abdominal pain mistaken or referred as chest pain

-   Extremities: asymmetric leg swelling (\>2 cm difference) for DVT/PE

    Diagnostic Studies

-   EKG: ACS (STEMI, new LBBB, ST depressions, TWI, Wellen's sign),
    pericarditis, pericardial effusion

-   Labs: Troponin (ACS, PE, myocarditis), CBC, BNP, lactate

-   CXR: PTX, PNA, dissection, esophageal rupture

-   Bedside US: pericardial effusion, R heart strain for PE, wall motion
    abnormality for infarct/ischemia or stress-induced CM, valvular dx,
    lung sliding/PTX

-   CTA: gold standard for PE. Dissection can be diagnosed w/ CTA, MRA,
    or TEE

-   VA-specific point: a pt with chest pain + positive troponin should
    be admitted to the CCU

+-----------+------------+------------+--------------+---------------+
| E         |            |            |              |               |
| valuation |            |            |              |               |
| for       |            |            |              |               |
| Coronary  |            |            |              |               |
| Disease   |            |            |              |               |
+===========+============+============+==============+===============+
| Test      | I          | Benefits   | Risks        | C             |
|           | ndications |            |              | onsiderations |
+-----------+------------+------------+--------------+---------------+
| EKG       | Low to     | Functional | Exercise     | Must have     |
| Stress    | In         | status w/  | tolerance    | normal ECG at |
|           | termediate | Bruce      |              | baseline,     |
|           | risk pts   | treadmill  | limits use   |               |
|           |            | protocol   |              | nondiagnostic |
|           | *Do not    |            |              | if 85% target |
|           | stress     |            |              | HR not        |
|           | active or  |            |              | achieved      |
|           | suspected  |            |              |               |
|           | ACS*       |            |              |               |
|           |            |            |              |               |
|           | Serves as  |            |              |               |
|           | screening  |            |              |               |
|           | with high  |            |              |               |
|           | NPV        |            |              |               |
+-----------+------------+------------+--------------+---------------+
| D         |            | More       | Cont         | Can be useful |
| obutamine |            | sensitive  | raindicated: | to eval low   |
| Echo      |            | than EKG   | arrhythmias, | grade low     |
| Stress    |            |            | LVOT         | flow AS       |
|           |            |            | obstruction, |               |
|           |            |            | HTN, AS      | Hold BB       |
+-----------+------------+------------+--------------+---------------+
| SPECT     |            | More       | Adenosine or | No caffeine   |
| stress    |            | sensitive  | Regadenoson  | or            |
|           |            | than echo, | con          | theophylline  |
|           |            |            | traindicated | prior         |
|           |            | Assess     | in reactive  |               |
|           |            | viability  | airway       |               |
|           |            |            | disease      |               |
+-----------+------------+------------+--------------+---------------+
| PET       |            | Better PPV | Better for   |               |
| stress    |            | than Echo  | pts with     |               |
|           |            |            | larger       |               |
|           |            | Assess     | abdominal    |               |
|           |            | viability  | girth (less  |               |
|           |            |            | d            |               |
|           |            |            | iaphragmatic |               |
|           |            |            | attenuation) |               |
+-----------+------------+------------+--------------+---------------+
| Cardiac   |            | Assesses   | Can assess   |               |
| MRI       |            | viability  | nonischemic  |               |
|           |            |            | vs ischemic  |               |
|           |            |            | car          |               |
|           |            |            | diomyopathy; |               |
|           |            |            | HR must be   |               |
|           |            |            | \< 70, gold  |               |
|           |            |            | standard for |               |
|           |            |            | structure    |               |
|           |            |            | and function |               |
+-----------+------------+------------+--------------+---------------+
| Coronary  |            | Very high  | Contrast     | Might have    |
| CT        |            | NPV for    | media        | poor lumen    |
|           |            | stenosis   | reactions    | visualization |
|           |            |            |              | if heavy      |
|           |            |            | CIN lower    | calcium       |
|           |            |            | risk than    | burden        |
|           |            |            | cath         |               |
|           |            |            |              | Does not      |
|           |            |            |              | assess        |
|           |            |            |              | functional    |
|           |            |            |              | status        |
+-----------+------------+------------+--------------+---------------+
| Coronary  | STEMI      | Direct     | CIN with     | Positive      |
| Angiogram |            | vis        | contrast     | Screen        |
|           | High risk  | ualization |              | (above)       |
|           | NSTEMI:    | of lumen   | Cath site    | necessitates  |
|           |            |            | c            | LHC           |
|           | Refractory | T          | omplications |               |
|           | angina,    | herapeutic |              | LHC is        |
|           | new        | PCI        | Rare: SCAD,  | diagnostic    |
|           | a          |            | cholesterol  | and           |
|           | rrhythmia, |            | emboli       | therapeutic   |
|           | c          |            |              |               |
|           | ardiogenic |            |              |               |
|           | shock (HF) |            |              |               |
|           |            |            |              |               |
|           | Suspected  |            |              |               |
|           | true ACS   |            |              |               |
+-----------+------------+------------+--------------+---------------+

Acute Coronary Syndromes -- Kelly Vogel

Background

-   Completely or partially occluding thrombus on a disrupted
    atherothrombotic coronary plaque leading to myocardial
    ischemia/infarction

-   STEMI: Elevated troponin & elevation in ST segment or new LBBB with
    symptoms

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \> 0.1 mV in at least 2 contiguous leads

-   Exception, in V2-V3:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   0.2 mV in men older than 40 y/o

-   0.25 in men younger than 40 y/o

-   0.15 mV in women

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NSTEMI: Evidence of myocardial necrosis (elevated troponin) w/o ST
    segment elevation

-   Unstable Angina: Angina without evidence of myocardial necrosis
    (normal troponin)

-   Newer nomenclature: occlusion and non-occlusion MI (OMI and NOMI)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Occlusion MI: near or total occlusion with insufficient collateral
    circulation causing active infarction, further broken into STEMI (+)
    OMI or STEMI (-) OMI; both considered a type I MI

-   Non-occlusion MI: no occlusion or sufficient collateral circulation
    to avoid active infarction, further broken into STEMI (+) NOMI or
    STEMI(-) NOMI; can be either type I or II MI

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other causes of myocardial injury: coronary spasm, embolism,
    imbalance of oxygen demand and supply 2/2 fever, tachycardia,
    hypo-/hypertension

    Presentation

-   Symptoms

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Classic Angina: dyspnea on exertion, substernal, pressure or
    vice-like quality, improved with rest. Note that response
    nitroglycerin is no longer in the guidelines.

-   Anginal Equivalents: nausea, weakness, epigastric pain (esp. in age
    \> 65 y/o, women, diabetics)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Change in pt's baseline angina, especially onset at rest

-   Physical Exam: sinus tachycardia, diaphoresis

-   If large infarct, can present with symptoms of acute heart failure

    Evaluation

-   EKG:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Compare to prior EKG and assess for

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   New ST elevations or ST depressions

-   T wave inversions: not specific but more concerning if deep (\>
    0.3mV)

-   Biphasic T waves and deep T wave inversions in leads V2 & V3
    (Wellens sign \[LAD\])

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cardiac biomarkers: troponin I is most sensitive for myocardial
    injury

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ACC/AHA guidelines recommend both EKG and trop q2-6 hours

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider this if high suspicion for ACS despite normal initial
    markers

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If negative x2, OK to stop trending

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other labs: lipid panel, TSH, A1C

Management

STEMI

-   STAT page Cardiology on call via Synergy (whether in VA or
    Vanderbilt)

-   ASAP: aspirin 325mg, heparin drip (high nomogram, with bolus)

-   Hold P2Y12 until discussed with cards fellow

    NSTEMI

-   Medical management followed by left-heart catheterization within 48h

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   General: bedrest, telemetry, repeat EKG with recurrent chest pain,
    NPO at midnight

-   Place cath case request (see "pre-catheterization" management below)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Anti-thrombotic therapy:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Antiplatelet agents:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ASA 325mg loading dose then 81mg daily after

    -   Do not give P2Y12 receptor blocker until discussed with
        cardiology fellow

-   Clopidogrel: prodrug that is metabolized (can have
    undermetabolizers) to active form, irreversible inhibition

-   Ticagrelor: reversible inhibitor

-   Prasugrel: prodrug but more rapidly metabolized than clopidogrel
    with less variation, irreversible inhibition, do not use w/ age \>
    75 or weight \< 60 kg

    -   Prasugrel and ticagrelor are superior to clopidogrel but have
        higher bleeding risk

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cangrelor: IV, rarely used

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Anti-coagulants: Unfractionated heparin drip

    -   Type this in Epic and select "nursing managed" protocol for
        "ACS"

    -   VA it can be found under the "Orders" tab along the left-hand
        column.

    -   Enoxaparin (LMHW) can be used but requires preserved renal
        function (CrCl \> 30) and most interventionalists prefer heparin
        prior to LHC

        Pre-Catheterization Care

-   Ensure pt is NPO at MN for planned cath

-   Continue anticoagulation with heparin gtt

-   Place cardiac catheterization request (must be in cardiology
    context). Can also call cath lab to ensure pt. is scheduled
    appropriately

    Post-Catheterization Care

    Catheterization Documentation

-   The most appropriate guidance for post-cath care in the cardiac
    catheterization report

-   VUMC: Epic 🡪 Cardiac tab 🡪 Cardiac Catheterization/Intervention
    Report

-   VA: Note tab 🡪 Post-Procedure note and Cardiac Catheterization note

-   If there is a delay in filing the final report at VUMC: Review the
    Cardiac Catheterization Nursing Documentation which shows if stents
    were deployed

    Post-Catheterization Heparin

-   Medical management w/o intervention: stop heparin unless directed in
    report

-   If indication for CABG (ex: Left main, proximal LAD), continue
    heparin gtt until surgery

-   PCI placed: stop heparin and continue/start DAPT as directed by
    cardiology

-   Other medical indication for anticoagulation (DVT/PE, atrial
    fibrillation): restart \~ six hours after catheterization

    Cath Site Checks:

-   6-8h post catheterization (typically can be signed out as 0000 cath
    check), only needed for femoral arterial access:

-   Look, listen, feel: evaluate for hematoma & pseudoaneurysm; call
    fellow if concerned

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Small amount of bruising and mild tenderness at the site is normal

-   Listen above and below the site for a bruit; the area should be soft

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hypotension after femoral access is concerning for RP bleed

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Apply pressure, STAT page interventional fellow, do NOT take pt to
    scanner prior to hearing back, order blood if needed

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Femoral oozing: Cardiology fellow, will need to hold pressure

-   Radial oozing: instruct nurse to re-inflate the TR band and restart
    the clock on deflation

    Post ACS Care:

-   Echo prior to discharge

-   DAPT: Aspirin 81 mg daily and P2Y12 agent

-   Beta blocker in all pts within 24 hours

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Metoprolol, carvedilol & bisoprolol have proven mortality benefit
    with reduced EF

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High intensity statin (ex: rosuvastatin 40 or atorvastatin 80). See
    outpt lipids section

-   ACEi/ARB if anterior STEMI, post-MI LV dysfunction

-   Lifestyle Modification: weight loss, smoking cessation, diabetes
    control

-   See heart failure section for management of HFrEF

    ACS Complications:

-   VT/VF, sinus bradycardia, third-degree heart block, new VSD, LV
    perforation, acute mitral regurgitation, pericarditis and
    cardiogenic shock; More common with STEMI🡪CCU post-cath

Pericarditis -- John Mitchell

Background

-   Inflammation of the pericardial sac

-   Etiologies:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infectious: Viral (Coxsackievirus, adenovirus, COVID-19), bacterial
    (TB, staph, strep), fungal

-   Inflammatory: Rheumatologic (most commonly SLE and RA),
    post-radiation, vaccine reaction, post pericardiotomy syndrome

-   Cardiac: Infarction (Dressler syndrome) and myocarditis

-   Miscellaneous: Trauma (including procedures e.g. cath, cardiac
    surgery), metabolic (uremia, hypothyroid), drug-induced, malignancy

-   Idiopathic (most common cause, assumed to be viral/post-viral)

    Presentation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   At least two criteria of four should be present:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sharp substernal pleuritic chest pain that is better with leaning
    forward

-   Pericardial friction rub

-   New widespread ST elevation and PR depression

-   New or worsening pericardial effusion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Chest pain almost always present. Pericardial rub highly specific

-   Even small effusion can help confirm diagnosis, but lack thereof
    does not rule it out

    Evaluation and Management

-   Always: EKG, chest x-ray, BMP, CBC, troponin, ESR, CRP and TTE

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TTE should be performed ASAP if tamponade suspected

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In select populations if warranted: Blood cultures, ANA, RF,
    anti-CCP, PPD, chest CT

-   Treatment:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NSAIDs (or glucocorticoids if contraindications to NSAIDs) AND
    colchicine

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ibuprofen 600-800mg TID (duration based on symptom resolution and
    normalization of CRP)

-   Prednisone 0.2-0.5mg/kg daily for 2 weeks followed by taper

-   Colchicine 0.6mg orally BID for 3 months

Arrhythmias

Acute management of arrhythmias:

-   12-lead EKG if possible and have defib pads on pt

-   Is the pt unstable (hypotensive, signs/symptoms of hypoperfusion)?

-   Is the information real?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Review tele strips if stable: VUMC Web Resources -\> VUH PIICiX
    Philips Web -\> pt selection -\> alarm review
    (vuhphilipsweb.app.vumc.org)

-   Review past EKGs to determine if pt has had this rhythm before

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ensure pt has good IV access

-   Labs: BMP, Mg, TSH, and +/- troponin, tox screen

Bradyarrhythmia -- Lin Cao

Background

-   Broadly classified as sinus node dysfunction (pacing defect) or
    atrioventricular block (conduction defect)

-   Clinical presentation varies widely based on underlying cause,
    timing, degree of block/dysfunction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Unlikely to cause symptoms if HR \>50

-   Symptoms include syncope/presyncope, dyspnea, angina

    Potential etiologies:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infection (including perivalvular abscess from endocarditis)/sepsis

-   Ischemia - Older age

-   Rheumatologic/Inflammatory - Post-cardiac surgery

-   Hypothyroidism - Sleep apnea

-   Infiltration (amyloid, hemochromatosis) - High vagal tone (pain,
    nausea)

-   Medications: Antihypertensives, antiarrhythmics, psychoactive meds,
    anesthetics, cannabis, muscle relaxants, etc

AV Block

![Diagram Description automatically generated with low
confidence](media/image9.png){width="2.6294444444444443in"
height="1.4442475940507438in"}

Evaluation

-   TTE if structural disease suspected

-   Ambulatory cardiac monitoring if frequently symptomatic

    Management

-   Avoid nodal blocking agents -- Adenosine, Beta-blockers, CCBs,
    Digoxin

-   Observation if asymptomatic

-   Treat identified underlying causes

-   If symptomatic or high-grade block (Mobitz II or complete heart
    block), EP consult for pacemaker evaluation

-   If unstable: Call CCU Fellow

Atropine (0.5 mg every 3 to 5 minutes; maximum total dose: 3 mg)

Do NOT use in heart transplant

Dopamine (5 to 20 mcg/kg/minute) OR Epi (2 to 10 mcg/min)

Transvenous pacing

(Pacer pads on the defib device are capable of pacing, but don't forget
to sedate!)

Tachyarrhythmias - Narrow Complex -- Manasa Atyam

Background

-   Three causes of tachyarrhythmias:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Re-entry: pt with structural heart disease (e.g. post-infarction
    scar)

-   Abnormal Automaticity: electrolyte abnormalities or acute ischemia
    (Purkinje fibers)

-   Triggered Activity: early and late after depolarizations. (e.g.
    Hypokalemia, ischemia, infracts, excess calcium and drug toxicity)

    Evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Unstable tachyarrhythmia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Start with treatment, determine type later

-   Synchronized cardioversion: place defibrillator pads, consider
    0.5-2mg IV midazolam for sedation, prepare for synchronized
    cardioversion at 200J (can ↑ to 300-360 J)

    Tachyarrhythmia differential

![Diagram Description automatically
generated](media/image10.png){width="1.869811898512686in"
height="1.7703346456692914in"}

Management

-   Sinus tachycardia- almost always secondary

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Address underlying causes: fever/sepsis, hypo/hypervolemia, anxiety,
    anemia, PE, ACS, hypoxia, pain, urinary retention, withdrawal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Atrial Fibrillation/Flutter -- See Atrial fibrillation section

-   AVNRT/Orthodromic AVRT

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Look for p buried in QRS, rate 150-250, AVRT will have delta waves
    when NSR

-   Vagal maneuvers (1st line): Sit pt upright 🡪 have them blow into tip
    of 10cc syringe for 10-15 seconds 🡪 rapidly lay supine and raise
    legs

-   Adenosine (2nd line): therapeutic (break AVRT/AVNRT) and diagnostic
    (allows visualization of underlying rhythm)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Do NOT give in heart transplant, severe COPD, pre-excitation causing
    wide complex tachycardia (WPW → antidromic AVRT)

-   Peripheral at AC or above w/ arm elevated: 6mg x1 → 6mg x1 (if not
    effective after 1-2 min) →12mg x1 (if refractory to 6mg)

-   Central: cut dose in half to 3mg x1 → 3mg x1 → 6mg

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Multifocal atrial tachycardia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   3 or more p wave morphologies. Seen in cardiac and pulmonary disease

-   Usually does not cause hemodynamic instability

-   BBs and non-DHP CCBs can be effective, need to address underlying
    issue

    Dosing

+------------+----------------+---------------------+-----------------+
| Drug       | Dosing         | Benefits            | Side Effects    |
+============+================+=====================+=================+
| Metoprolol | 5mg IV q5m x3  | Good 1st line agent | Hypotension,    |
|            |                |                     |                 |
|            | PO metop       | Less BP effect than | Negative        |
|            | tartrate       | dilt                | inotropy        |
|            | 12.5mg q6h, ↑  |                     |                 |
|            | every 6h to    |                     |                 |
|            | target         |                     |                 |
+------------+----------------+---------------------+-----------------+
| Diltiazem  | 10-20mg IV     | Good 1st line w/    | Hypotension     |
|            | over 2m q15m   | normal EF with drip |                 |
|            | x2             | needed              | Avoid in HFrEF  |
|            |                |                     |                 |
|            | drip =         |                     |                 |
|            | 5-15mg/h       |                     |                 |
+------------+----------------+---------------------+-----------------+
| Esmolol    | 500mcg/kg      | Rapid onset/offset  | Hypotension     |
|            | bolus          |                     |                 |
|            |                | RBC metabolism      |                 |
|            | drip =         |                     |                 |
|            | 50             |                     |                 |
|            | -200mcg/kg/min |                     |                 |
+------------+----------------+---------------------+-----------------+
| Amiodarone | 150mg IV over  | Minimal BP effects  | Pulmonary and   |
|            | 10-30m, then   |                     | thyroid         |
|            | 1mg/m for 6h,  | Long lasting;       | toxicity        |
|            | then 0.5mg/m   | Relatively fast     |                 |
|            | for 18h        | onset (acute effect | Cardioversion   |
|            |                | is mostly beta      |                 |
|            |                | blockade)           |                 |
+------------+----------------+---------------------+-----------------+
| Digoxin    | 500mcg IV x1,  | Great for reduced   | Slow onset      |
|            |                | EF, positive        |                 |
|            | then 250mcg IV | inotropy            | Depends on      |
|            | q6h x2-3       |                     | vagal tone --   |
|            |                |                     | poor in hyper-  |
|            |                |                     | adrenergic      |
|            |                |                     | states          |
+------------+----------------+---------------------+-----------------+
| Pr         | 20-50mg/min    | Use in              | Lupus-like      |
| ocainamide | loading,       | pre-excitation      | syndrome        |
|            | 1-4mg/min      | syndromes (i.e.     |                 |
|            | maintenance    | WPW), does not      | Hypotension     |
|            |                | inhibit AV nodal    |                 |
|            |                | conduction          |                 |
+------------+----------------+---------------------+-----------------+

Tachyarrhythmias - Wide Complex and PVCs -- Manasa Atyam

Definitions

-   Premature Ventricular Complex (PVC): early ventricular
    depolarization +/- mechanical contraction

-   PVCs are common: Up to 80% of apparently healthy people have PVCs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Normal number of PVCs in an adult is \<500/24h

-   PVC induced cardiomyopathy may be present with PVC burden \>10-20%

-   Inpt Eval: Order 12 lead EKG to look for conduction disease (Long
    QT, brugada), K, Mg, TSH, Drug screen (EtOH, nicotine, stimulants,
    caffeine), med rec for QT prolonging agents, tele to assess PVC
    burden

-   Inpt management: consult to EP for PVCs rarely warranted unless
    significant PVC burden (\>5 PVC/min, consistently) in setting of
    reduced LVEF.

-   For pts with \>5 PVC/min or pts with symptoms, discharge with
    Ziopatch (VA) or mobile cardiac telemetry (VU) and obtain TTE if
    none recent

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ventricular tachycardia: a run of 3+ PVCs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sustained VT: VT for \>30 seconds or shorter if it requires
    intervention

-   Nonsustained VT (NSVT): VT for \< 30 seconds

-   VT storm: 3+ separate episodes of sustained VT within 24 hrs.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   VT Morphologies

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Monomorphic VT: similar QRS configuration from beat to beat

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Usually 2/2 scar-mediated VT from prior infarction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Polymorphic VT: a continuously changing QRS configuration from beat
    to beat

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ischemia until proven otherwise

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Torsades de Pointes: a form of polymorphic VT with a continually
    varying QRS that appears to spiral around the baseline of the ECG in
    a sinusoidal pattern

-   Ventricular fibrillation (VF): chaotic rhythm characterized by
    undulations that are irregular in timing and morphology, without
    discrete QRS complexes

    Ventricular Tachycardia vs. SVT with aberrancy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   VT: The action potential originated in the ventricles (ex: VT)

-   Supraventricular tachycardia with aberrancy: the action potential
    originates from a focus above the ventricles & conducts through the
    AV node with a delay or block resulting in a wide QRS (mimics VT)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ex: sinus tachycardia w/ bundle branch block (block may be rate
    dependent), AF w/ LBBB

Many ways to differentiate VT vs. SVT w/ aberrancy

![A picture containing calendar Description automatically
generated](media/image11.tiff){width="2.473888888888889in"
height="1.6974879702537182in"}

-   There are more advanced criteria to help distinguish. The aVR
    (Vereckie) criteria is one example that is fast and accurate

Management

Unstable

-   Sedate with midazolam 1-2mg

-   Cardioversion for monomorphic VT. Synchronized shock at 100-200J

-   Defibrillation if VF/polymorphic VT

    Stable

-   Medications:

+-------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
| Drug Name         | Dosing                  | Side Effects           |
| (Anti-arrhythmic  |                         |                        |
| class)            |                         |                        |
+===================+=========================+========================+
| Amiodarone (class | 150mg IV over 10 min,   | Bradycardia,           |
| III)              | then 1mg/min for 6      | hypotension (acutely)  |
|                   | hours; repeat bolus if  |                        |
|                   | VT recurs               |                        |
+-------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
| Lidocaine (class  | 1-1.5mg/kg (usually     | Slurred speech, AMS,   |
| IIB)              | 75-100mg) at a rate of  | seizures, bradycardia  |
|                   | 25-50mg/min; lower      |                        |
|                   | doses of .5-.75mg/kg    |                        |
|                   | can be repeated every   |                        |
|                   | 5-10min as needed       |                        |
+-------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+
| Procainamide      | 20-50mg/min until       | Bradycardia,           |
| (class IA)        | arrhythmia terminates   | hypotension, torsades, |
|                   | or max dose 17mg/kg is  | drug-induced lupus     |
|                   | reached                 |                        |
|                   |                         | Avoid in HF pts,       |
|                   |                         | prolonged QT           |
+-------------------+-------------------------+------------------------+

-   Cardioversion if refractory to medical management

-   Treatment of underlying cause if identifiable

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ischemia, electrolyte disturbances, heart failure, drugs

Atrial Fibrillation and Flutter -- Matt Gayoso

Background

-   AF: 12-lead EKG with absence of p-waves and irregularly irregular
    QRS complexes

-   Flutter: sawtooth atrial F waves (300 BPM) with regular or regularly
    irregular QRS complexes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ventricular rate ratio of F waves: V waves \~150 (2:1), \~100 (3:1),
    or \~75 (4:1)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   3 classifications:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Paroxysmal (terminates within 7 days)

-   Persistent (persisting beyond 7 days)

-   Permanent (normal rhythm cannot be restored)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Rapid ventricular response (RVR) is HR \> 100 (i.e. AF/Flutter w/
    tachycardia)

-   AF/RVR is far more often a consequence of hypotension than the cause
    of it

    Evaluation

-   Causes: Mnemonic "H PIRATES"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hypertension

-   Pneumonia, Pericarditis, Post-op

-   Ischemia (rare)

-   Rheumatic Valve

-   Atrial Myxoma or Accessory Pathway

-   Thyrotoxicosis

-   Ethanol or Excess Volume

-   Sick sinus, Sepsis

-   Additional causes: Lung disease (COPD, asthma, smoking), OSA

    Management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Treatment goals:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Rate control, Goal HR \< 110 (RACE II)

-   Rhythm control (if indicated)

-   Stroke prevention (CHADS2VASc)

    Rate control:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   RVR \~ sinus tach of AF; Always work to address the underlying cause
    (infection, volume overload, etc.). Rate control is rarely an
    emergency unless the pt is unstable

-   If stable with RVR (SBP \>90)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IV if HR \> 130 or symptomatic (metop 5mg IV or dilt 15-20mg IV),
    otherwise opt for PO

-   AV nodal blocking agents

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   B-blockers: Start with metop tartrate (titratable) 🡪 consolidate to
    succinate. Avoid in decompensated or borderline HF

-   Calcium channel blockers (diltiazem): avoid in HFrEF

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Peri stable (SBPs 80-90s w/ preserved perfusion)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Amiodarone: Consider if decompensated HF, accessory pathway,
    anti-coagulated. Caution that you may cardiovert pt (stroke risk)

-   Digoxin: consider if decompensated HF, will require IV loading dose
    prior to transition to PO. Will need to monitor digoxin levels

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Unstable (SBPs \<80)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cardioversion

    Rhythm Control

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   New onset a-fib (first time diagnosis): most pts will be a candidate
    for trial of cardioversion

-   If onset clearly within 48h, can proceed without TEE. Often TEE is
    done anyway (pt may have had intermittent asymp AF)

-   If onset \>48h or unclear, will need TEE to rule out LAA thrombus

-   Pharmacologic options include class 1C: flecainide, propafenone
    (avoid in structural heart disease) and class 3: Amiodarone,
    dronedarone, sotalol, ibutilide, dofetilide (some require loading
    inpt)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Caution using antiarrhythmics in any pt you wouldn't electrically
    cardiovert without TEE

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider EP consult for ablation in symptomatic paroxysmal or
    persistent AF refractory to anti-arrhythmic drugs, AF in HFrEF, or
    flutter in outpt setting

    Stroke Prevention (for AF and flutter)

-   CHA2DS2-VASc risk score \>2 in M or \>3 in F should prompt long term
    AC in AF persisting \>48 hours

-   DOACs (apixaban, dabigatran, edoxaban, rivaroxaban) are preferred to
    warfarin except in moderate to severe MS or mechanical valve

-   If cardioversion planned for new onset AF, start AC as soon as
    possible

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Post-cardioversion, anticoagulate for at least 4 weeks d/t atrial
    stunning and stroke risk

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If no contraindications or procedures, continue anticoagulation
    while inpt

-   Typically, do not need to bridge AC for AF in the setting of
    procedures unless mechanical valve is present. Decide on a case
    by-case basis

-   Left atrial appendage closure can be considered in those with
    increased risk of bleeding (WATCHMAN, Amulet devices)

Heart Failure -- Leonie Dupuis

Background

ACC/AHA Stages of HF

-   Stage A: At risk but without structural heart disease, symptoms, or
    cardiac biomarkers

-   Stage B: no symptoms/signs of HF; presence of structural heart
    disease, incr filling pressures, or incr cardiac biomarkers

-   Stage C: + structural HD, + prior or current symptoms

-   Stage D: marked HF, symptoms interfere with daily life and recurrent
    hospitalizations

    NY Heart Association (NYHA) Functional Classes of HF

-   Class I: Normal physical activity is not limited

-   Class II: Comfortable at rest; normal physical activity results in
    HF symptoms

-   Class III: Comfortable at rest; less than normal activity leads to
    HF symptoms (such as walking short distances)

-   Class IV: Inability to perform any physical activity without
    symptoms

Etiologies

HFrEF (clinical diagnosis + LVEF \< 40%)

-   Ischemic (approx. 2/3): Obstructive CAD, previous/current myocardial
    infarction

-   Non-ischemic:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Load: HTN, valvulopathy

-   Arrhythmia: tachyarrhythmia, pacemaker induced

-   Myocardium:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Toxins (EtOH, drugs, chemo, radiation),

-   Inflammatory (infections, AI),

-   Metabolic (thyroid, thiamine deficiency),

-   Infiltrative (amyloid, sarcoid, hemochromatosis)

-   Stress induced/takotsubo CM

-   Genetic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Idiopathic

HFpEF: HTN, CAD, obesity, DM, infiltrative, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy

Causes of Heart Failure Exacerbations (FAILURES)

-   Forgetting medications or taking drugs that can worsen HF (e.g. BB,
    CCB, NSAIDs, TZDs), chemo (anthracyclines, trastuzumab)

-   Arrhythmia/Anemia: AF, VT, PVCs; Increased arrhythmia burden on
    device check?

-   Ischemia/Infarction/Infection: myocarditis; Acute vascular
    dysfunction (e.g. endocarditis), especially mitral or aortic
    regurgitation.

-   Lifestyle choices: Dietary indiscretions - high salt, EtOH,
    excessive fluid intake. Obesity.

-   Upregulation (of CO): pregnancy and hyperthyroidism

-   Renal failure: acute, progression of CKD, or insufficient dialysis

-   Embolus (pulmonary) or COPD

-   Stenosis (worsening AS, RAS)

    Presentation

-   Volume overload: shortness of breath, dyspnea on exertion,
    Orthopnea, PND

-   Nausea/poor po intake (hepatic and gut congestion)

-   Confusion (decreased CO)

-   Exam: Edema (legs, sacrum), rales, S3, S4, murmur (AS, MR), elevated
    JVD, + hepatojugular reflux, ascites

    Evaluation

-   CBC, CMP, Magnesium, Lactate, TSH, iron studies

-   Troponin, ECG

-   BNP (Pro-BNP if on Entresto) -- high negative predictive value for
    HF (false negative can occur in obese pts)

-   CXR -- differentiate other causes of dyspnea

-   TTE

-   Determine hemodynamic and volume profile:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cold vs warm

-   Dry vs wet

+---------+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+
| >       |                  | > Euvolemia       | > Hypervolemia     |
|  Volume |                  |                   |                    |
| >       |                  |                   |                    |
|  Status |                  |                   |                    |
+=========+==================+===================+====================+
| >       | Warm Extremities | > Warm and Dry    | > Warm and Wet     |
| Cardiac |                  | >                 | >                  |
| > Index | Adequate UOP     | > Forrester Class | > Forrester Class  |
| >       |                  | > I               | > II               |
| > Low   | Nl Pulse         | >                 | >                  |
| >       | Pressure         | > Tx: GDMT as     | > Tx: Diuresis,    |
|  Normal |                  | > tolerated       | > Vasodilators     |
+---------+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+
|         | Cardiogenic      | > Cold and Dry    | > Cold and Wet     |
|         | Shock            | >                 | >                  |
|         |                  | > Forrester Class | > Forrester Class  |
|         | Cool Extremities | > III             | > IV               |
|         |                  | >                 | >                  |
|         | Renal Failure    | > Tx: Inotropes   | > Tx: Diuresis     |
|         |                  |                   | > +Tailored        |
|         | Narrow Pulse     |                   | > therapy (+/-     |
|         | Pressure         |                   | > vasodilators,    |
|         |                  |                   | > inotropes)       |
+---------+------------------+-------------------+--------------------+

Management of exacerbations

-   Tele, Daily STANDING weights, 2L fluid restriction, 2g sodium diet,
    strict I/O

-   Diuresis: Place on 2.5 x home dose of IV diuretic, dose BID-TID
    (DOSE Trial)

-   Goal is to be net negative (generally 1-2L per day but pt dependent)

-   Check BMP BID and Mg QD, keep K\>4 and Mg\>2

-   Low threshold for substantial increase (double) in loop vs
    transition to drip if not diuresing adequately

-   Can also augment with sequential nephron blockade (thiazides,
    acetazolamide)

-   Lasix 40mg PO = Lasix 20mg IV = Torsemide 20mg PO/IV = Bumex 1mg
    PO/IV

-   Continuation/optimization of GDMT (below)

Guideline-Directed Medical Therapy for HFrEF

General Principles:

-   Starting pts on low dose of multiple agents preferred to max dose of
    single agent

-   D/C summary should have discharge weight, GDMT and diuretic regimen,
    and renal function

-   Daily home weights w/ rescue diuretic plan (pm dose for 3lbs in 1
    day, 5lbs in 3 days

+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Common Drugs  | Indication      | Mechanism/      | Precautions     |
|               |                 | Benefits        |                 |
+===============+=================+=================+=================+
| Beta Blockers |                 |                 |                 |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Carvedilol    | HFrEF \<40 %    | Blocks          | Avoid if pt is  |
|               |                 | catecholamines. | decompensated   |
| Metoprolol    | Stage C HF      | Decreased HR/   | (cold); "start  |
| succinate     | (NYHA class I   | myocardial      | low and go      |
|               | -- IV)          | oxygen demand   | slow"           |
| Bisoprolol    |                 |                 |                 |
|               |                 | Less adverse    | Can continue    |
|               |                 | remodeling.     | during          |
|               |                 |                 | exacerbation if |
|               |                 |                 | pt compensated  |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| ARNIs         |                 |                 |                 |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Sacubitril/   | HFrEF \< 40%    | Prevents        | Need 36h        |
| valsartan     |                 | vasoactive      | wash-out period |
|               | NYHA class II   | natriuretic     | if              |
|               | -- IV           | peptide         | transitioning   |
|               |                 | degradation     | from ACEi to    |
|               | Used in place   | involved in     | ARNI.           |
|               | of ACE/ARB      | pathogenesis of |                 |
|               |                 | HF (+ action of | Hypotension     |
|               |                 | ARB)            |                 |
|               |                 |                 | Risk of         |
|               |                 |                 | angioedema      |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| ACEIs/ARBs    |                 |                 |                 |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Lisinopril    | HFrEF \<40 %    | Blocks RAAS     | Risk of         |
|               |                 | activation      | angioedema      |
| Enalapril     | Stage C HF      |                 |                 |
|               | (NYHA class I   | Reduces adverse | Monitor renal   |
| Losartan      | -- IV)          | cardiac and     | function and K  |
|               |                 | vascular        |                 |
| Valsartan     |                 | remodeling      | Preference for  |
|               |                 |                 | ARB \> ACEi if  |
|               |                 |                 | plans to start  |
|               |                 |                 | ARNI            |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| MRAs          |                 |                 |                 |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Eplerenone    | NYHA class      | Diuretic and    | Hyperkalemia    |
|               | II-IV and GFR   | blood pressure  |                 |
| S             | \>30 and K \<5  | lowering        |                 |
| pironolactone |                 | effects and     |                 |
|               |                 | blocks          |                 |
|               |                 | deleterious     |                 |
|               |                 | effects of      |                 |
|               |                 | aldosterone on  |                 |
|               |                 | the heart       |                 |
|               |                 | (including      |                 |
|               |                 | hypertrophy and |                 |
|               |                 | fibrosis)       |                 |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| SGLT2i        |                 |                 |                 |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Dapagliflozin | HFrEF \<40%     | Osmotic         | UTI/ GU         |
|               | with and        | diuresis and    | infections      |
| Empagliflozin | without DM      | natriuresis,    |                 |
|               |                 | improve         | Risk of         |
|               | NYHA class      | myocardial      | ketoacidosis    |
|               | II-IV           | metabolism,     | (both DKA and   |
|               |                 | inhibit         | euglycemic)     |
|               |                 | sodium-hydrogen |                 |
|               |                 | exchange in     |                 |
|               |                 | myocardium,     |                 |
|               |                 | reduce cardiac  |                 |
|               |                 | fibrosis        |                 |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Vasodilators  |                 |                 |                 |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Hydralazine   | Persistently    | Reduces cardiac | Hypotension     |
|               | symptomatic     | afterload and   |                 |
| Isosorbide    | black pts       | preload and may |                 |
| Dinitrate     | despite ARNI/   | also enhance    |                 |
|               | BB/ MRA/ SGLT2i | nitric oxide    |                 |
|               |                 | bioavailability |                 |
|               | NYHA class      |                 |                 |
|               | III-IV          | Reduction in    |                 |
|               |                 | mortality for   |                 |
|               |                 | African         |                 |
|               |                 | American pts    |                 |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Ivabradine    |                 |                 |                 |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Ivabradine    | HFrEF \<35%, on | I(f) current    | Need sinus      |
|               | maximally       | inhibitor       | rhythm          |
|               | tolerated BB,   | involved in SA  |                 |
|               | sinus rhythm    | node activity   | Caution in      |
|               | with HR \> 70   |                 | sinus node      |
|               |                 | Decr HR         | disease and     |
|               | NYHA class II   | associated with | conduction      |
|               | or III          | improved        | defects         |
|               |                 | outcomes        |                 |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Iron          |                 |                 |                 |
| Repletion     |                 |                 |                 |
| (IV)          |                 |                 |                 |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Iron sucrose  | Ferritin \<100  | Decreases HF    | Risk of         |
|               | µg/L or         | h               | anaphylaxis     |
| Ferric        | ferritin        | ospitalizations | higher in iron  |
| c             | 100-299 µg/L    |                 | dextran         |
| arboxymaltose | AND transferrin | Improves        |                 |
|               | saturation      | exercise        |                 |
| Iron dextran  | \<20%           | function and    |                 |
|               |                 | QOL             |                 |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

Device therapies (after optimization of medical GDMT for 3 months):

Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT)

-   Class I indication: NYHA class II--IV, LVEF ≤35% with QRS ≥150 ms
    and left bundle branch block (LBBB)

    ICD

-   Class I indication: NYHA class II--VI with LVEF \<35% (must have
    \>1yr expected survival and 40+ days from MI)

    Mitra Clip

-   Criteria: moderate to severe mitral regurgitation (3-4+), on
    maximally tolerated GDMT, an ejection fraction \>20%, and a left
    ventricle end-systolic dimension of less than 7cm

Guideline-Directed Medical Therapy for HFpEF

Medications overlap with HFrEF treatment (above) but outcomes are less
significant

-   SGLT2 inhibitors can decrease HF hospitalizations and CV mortality

-   MRAs can decrease HF hospitalizations

-   ARBs and ARNis can be used to decrease hospitalizations

-   Diuretics as needed for congestion (no morbidity or mortality
    benefit)

Cardiogenic Shock -- Sims Hershey

Definition

-   Impairment of CO due to primary cardiac disorder that results in
    end-organ hypoperfusion and hypoxia

-   Mortality up to 40-50%

    Etiology

-   Cardiomyopathic: acute myocardial infarction with LV dysfunction
    (most common cause), exacerbation of heart failure, PHTN
    exacerbation, myocarditis, myocardial contusion, drug-induced

-   Arrhythmic: atrial tachycardias (atrial fibrillation/flutter, AVRT,
    AVNRT), VT/VF, complete heart block, 2^nd^ degree heart block

-   Mechanical: valvular insufficiency, valvular rupture, papillary
    muscle rupture, critical valvular stenosis, ventricular septal wall
    defect, ruptured ventricular wall aneurysm, atrial myxoma, HOCM

    Presentation and diagnostic criteria

-   "Cold and wet" - decreased perfusion due to reduced cardiac output
    with pulmonary congestion and/or increased left sided filling
    pressures. May also be "cold and dry" in the setting of normal PCWP
    with low cardiac output.

-   Signs of end-organ hypoperfusion - AMS, cold and clammy skin,
    decreased UOP (\<30cc/hr), and elevated lactate (\>2).

-   SBP \< 90 mmHg for \>30min or needing vasopressors to achieve this
    goal, usually with narrow pulse pressure

-   Initially, SVR is elevated in the s/o hypoperfusion. SVR then
    declines in progressive shock due to vasodilation in the s/o
    systemic inflammation causing elevated NO in the shock state.

    Evaluation

-   EKG

-   Labs: CBC, CMP, BNP, troponin, lactate

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Evidence of end organ damage: lactic acidosis, acute kidney injury,
    acute liver injury, elevated troponin, elevated BNP

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Echocardiogram: assess EF and valves

-   LHC If ischemia (see ACS)

-   Hemodynamic monitoring via Swan-Ganz or PA catheter:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   No benefit for general shock but does improve in-hospital mortality
    for those with cardiogenic shock

-   PA catheter hemodynamic profile:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cardiac index \< 2.2 with support or \<1.8 without support,, cardiac
    power \<0.6, SVR \>1200 initially, then may drop \<800 as systemic
    inflammation causes vasodilation,, SVO2 (mixed venous O2 sat) \<60%,
    RVEDP \>10

-   LV-dominant: PCWP \>RA (CVP), PAPi \>1.5 (pulmonary artery
    pulsatility index)

-   RV-dominant: RA \>15, PCWP \<15, PAPi \<1.5

-   Bi-V-dominant: RA \>15, PCWP \>15, PAPi \<1.5

-   PAPi \< 0.9 predicts RV failure and that pt will likely need RV
    support. PAPi \<1.85 predicts RV failure in pts with LVADs

-   CPO \< 0.6 strongest independent hemodynamic correlate of mortality
    in CS

-   See right heart cath section for interpreting PA catheter profiles

    Management (medical & mechanical circulatory support)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Medical management: focus on optimizing preload, afterload, and
    contractility

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Preload: IV diuresis -- hypotension IMPROVES with diuresis in
    cardiogenic shock

-   Afterload: IV -- nitroglycerine, nitroprusside; PO -- hydralazine,
    isosorbide dinitrate; vasoconstricting pressors (phenylephrine,
    vasopressin) if needing BP support

-   Contractility - Inodilators (increase contractility, decrease
    afterload -- milrinone, dobutamine) or inoconstrictors (increase
    contractility and afterload -- epinephrine, norepinephrine)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mechanical circulatory support indications:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Shock refractory to \>1 pressor

-   Shock 2/2 MI (physiology: unloads LV, increases systemic perfusion,
    increases myocardial perfusion, and provides hemodynamic support
    during PCI)

Types of mechanical circulatory support (MCS):

+-------+---------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+
|       | Intra-aortic  | V-A ECMO     | Tandem Heart  | Impella     |
|       | Balloon Pump  |              |               |             |
+=======+===============+==============+===============+=============+
| Mech  | Balloon pump  | Blood from   | LV: blood     | Impella 5.5 |
| anics | placed in the | femoral vein | aspirated     | & CP: Blood |
| of    | proximal      | is           | from LA to    | aspirated   |
| Su    | aorta that    | oxygenated   | femoral       | from LV and |
| pport | inflates      | and pumped   | artery        | ejected to  |
|       | during        | to femoral   |               | aortic root |
|       | diastole and  | artery       | RV: blood     |             |
|       | deflates      |              | aspirated     | Impella RP: |
|       | during        |              | from RA to PA | Blood       |
|       | systole       |              |               | aspirated   |
|       |               |              |               | from IVC    |
|       |               |              |               | and         |
|       |               |              |               | delivered   |
|       |               |              |               | to PA       |
+-------+---------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+
| Flow  | 0.5 - 1 LMP   | 4-6 LPM      | 4-5 LPM       | 2.5 to 5    |
|       |               |              |               | LPM         |
+-------+---------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+
| Su    | LV            | BiV          | LV, RV, or    | LV or RV    |
| pport |               |              | BiV           | (RP)        |
+-------+---------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+
| He    | Reduces       | Increases    | Increases     | Reduces SV  |
| modyn | afterload and | afterload    | afterload     |             |
| amics | LVEDP🡪decr    |              |               | Reduces     |
|       | cardiac work, | Reduces SV   | Reduces SV    | preload and |
|       | O2            |              |               | PCWP        |
|       | consumption   | Reduces LV   | Reduces LV    |             |
|       |               | preload and  | preload and   | Improves    |
|       | Increases SV  | PCWP         | PCWP          | tissue      |
|       | Increases     |              |               | perfusion   |
|       | coronary      | Improves     | Improves      |             |
|       | perfusion     | tissue       | tissue        |             |
|       |               | perfusion    | perfusion     |             |
+-------+---------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+
| Com   | Infection,    | Circuit      | Tamponade d/t | Pump        |
| plica | stroke,       | thrombosis,  | perforation,  | migration,  |
| tions | thro          | LV dilation. | bleeding,     | bleeding,   |
|       | mbocytopenia, | Hypothermia, | femoral AV    | hemolysis,  |
|       | balloon       | air          | fistula,      | aortic      |
|       | m             | embolism,    | thr           | regurg,     |
|       | alpositioning | bleeding,    | omboembolism, | stroke,     |
|       | leading to    | thro         | ASD, limb     | p           |
|       | ischemia,     | mbocytopenia | ischemia      | erforation, |
|       | aortic        |              |               | VT/VF       |
|       | rupture, air  |              |               |             |
|       | embolism      |              |               |             |
+-------+---------------+--------------+---------------+-------------+

Possible contraindications to mechanical circulatory support:

-   Aortic regurgitation, intracardiac shunt via ASD, VSD, or PFO,
    severe RV dysfunction, LA or ventricular thrombus, aortic
    dissection, uncontrolled sepsis, severe coagulopathy or bleeding
    diathesis

    Daily management of MCS devices:

-   Ensure optimal placement of device with daily CXR/Echo

-   Anticoagulation (based on device)

-   Hematoma monitoring at device site

-   Check distal pulses to monitor for limb ischemia

Cardiac Devices -- Matt Gayoso

1\. Pacemakers:

-   Provide anti-bradycardia pacing by stimulating myocardium

-   Peripheral permanent pacemakers (PPMs)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   SubQ generator, transvenous leads

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Single chamber RV or RA lead

-   Dual chamber RV and RA leads (most common)

-   BiV (CRT- cardiac resynchronization therapy): RV, RA, and LV
    (coronary sinus) leads

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Leadless pacemaker (Micra)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Implanted generator in RV

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Symptomatic sinus node dysfunction: sinoatrial exit block, sinus
    pause, sinus bradycardia, tachy-brady syndrome

-   Degenerative AV block: 2^nd^ degree type II (Mobitz II) or 3^rd^
    degree

-   Neurocardiogenic syncope

    2\. Implantable Cardioverter/Defibrillators (ICDs)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Types:

-   Transvenous: defibrillation coil +/- pacing lead

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Detect and treat VT/VF

-   Anti-tachycardic pacing (ATP)- attempts to pace out of VT to prevent
    a shock

-   Defibrillation if ATP unsuccessful

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Subcutaneous: defibrillation only, all extravascular

-   Indications:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Primary prevention

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   HFrEF

    -   EF \<35% and NYHA II-III or EF \<30% and NYHA I

    -   Must be \>90d from revasc, \>40d from MI, and on GDMT \>90d if
        non-ischemic

-   Arrhythmogenic syndromes

    -   Arrhythmogenic RV cardiomyopathy, Brugada syndrome, HCM and
        cardiac sarcoid with specific risk factors

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Secondary prevention

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sudden cardiac death

-   Sustained VT/VF

-   Inducible VT on EP study with history of syncope

    3\. Cardiac Resynchronization Therapy (CRT)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   BiV pacer that coordinates LV/RV contraction through synchronized
    activation of each ventricle following atrial contraction.

-   -P: CRT pacing only

-   -D: ICD function

-   Class I indications: LBBB and QRS≥150 with EF\<35%, NYHA II-IV, on
    GDMT \>90d, NSR

    4\. Loop Recorders: implantable devices for monitoring arrhythmias
    (most often Afib)

    5\. LVADs: augment cardiac output for end-stage heart failure

Interpreting Pacemaker Codes

+----------------------+----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+
|                      | 1st      | 2nd       | 3rd       | 4th       |
|                      | Letter   | Letter    | Letter    | Letter    |
+======================+==========+===========+===========+===========+
| > A: atrial, V:      | Chamber  | Chamber   | Response  | Program   |
| > ventricular, D:    | Paced    | Sensed    | to Sensed | Features  |
| > dual, O: none, I:  |          |           | Beat      |           |
| > inhibition, R:     |          |           |           |           |
| > rate-adaptive      |          |           |           |           |
+----------------------+----------+-----------+-----------+-----------+

Examples of Common Pacing Modes:

-   VVI: Single RV lead that delivers a beat if no beat sensed. Often
    used with chronic AF with bradycardia

-   DDDR: Senses and paces both the atria and ventricle. If beat not
    sensed within a predefined interval, beat delivered. R indicates
    rate responsivity (changes rate based on changes in pt activity)

-   Magnet: Paces at a fixed rate without respect to native electrical
    activity (AOO,VOO,DOO). Deactivates ICD shock. Often used in surgery
    or at end of life to avoid ICD shocks

    Peri-Procedural Anticoagulation:

-   NOAC: hold 24-72h before procedure and 24-72h following procedure

-   Warfarin: continue through procedure

-   Antiplatelet: continue through procedure

-   Heparin and heparin related products to be avoided peri-implantation
    due to higher rates of pocket hematoma

    Placement Complications

-   Pocket hematoma - Cardiac Tamponade

-   Pneumothorax - Infection

-   Myocardial Perforation - Lead Displacement or Disconnection

    Long term Complications

-   Secondary device Infection

-   Lead fracture (lead lifetime 10-15 years)

-   Insulation failure

    The Pacemaker ID app is free and is useful for identifying device
    brand for interrogation

    When differentiating PPM vs. ICD, look for a coil and charge
    generator to identify the ICD.

    ![A picture containing text, X-ray film Description automatically
    generated](media/image12.tiff){width="1.8736832895888014in"
    height="1.3893285214348206in"}

Pulmonary Embolism -- Anna Berry

Background

-   A thrombus originating in a deep vein (LE \> UE) embolizing to the
    pulmonary arterial circulation

-   Risk Factors = Virchow's Triad

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stasis: immobilization, hospitalization, spinal cord injury, or long
    travel

-   Hypercoagulable state: cancer, prothrombotic genetic conditions such
    as Factor V Leiden, OCPs, antiphospholipid syndrome, nephrotic
    syndrome, pregnancy, infection, etc.

-   Endothelial Injury: surgery, trauma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most originate from a DVT in the iliac, femoral, and popliteal veins

    Presentation

-   Dyspnea and tachypnea

-   Respiratory alkalosis on blood gas from hyperventilation

-   Hypoxemia

-   Sinus Tachycardia or atrial arrhythmias

    Hemoptysis

-   Lower extremity pain, swelling, and redness -- occurs in 50% of pts
    with DVT

-   RV Failure (large PE) -- elevated JVP, hypotension, syncope, R
    parasternal heave, accentuated P2, hepatomegaly

    Evaluation

-   If hemodynamically unstable and PE suspected, provide hemodynamic
    support (ie. O2, pressors, etc.) and perform emergent bedside TTE

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If no RV strain evident on TTE, low likelihood of hemodynamically
    significant PE. Consider other causes of shock

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hemodynamically stable

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   EKG

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most commonly sinus tachycardia

-   Less commonly and indicative of large PE: Right axis deviation, RVH,
    RBBB, RA enlargement, S1Q3T3 (deep S in lead I, deep Q and inverted
    T in lead III), TWI in V1-V3

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CXR: Typically normal. May see linear atelectasis, pleural effusion,
    PA cutoff sign

-   Labs: ABG, troponin, BNP

-   May consider lower extremity dopplers

-   Imaging vs d-dimer based on pre-test probability:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Low pre-test probability (use Wells Criteria) → d-dimer

-   For moderate to high pre-test probability→ CTA Chest PE protocol

    -   If high pre-test probability or moderate pre-test probability
        with \>4h delay in work-up, start empiric anticoagulation if
        bleeding risk is acceptable while work-up is ongoing

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TTE

Management

+----------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
| Categorization | Low risk        | Submassive     | Massive        |
| of PE          |                 |                |                |
+================+=================+================+================+
| Definition     | Hemodynamically | H              | H              |
|                | stable          | emodynamically | emodynamically |
|                |                 | stable         | unstable (ex:  |
|                | No evidence of  |                | SBP\<90)       |
|                | right heart     | Evidence of    |                |
|                | strain or       | right heart    | Evidence of RV |
|                | myocardial      | strain or      | strain         |
|                | necrosis on     | myocardial     |                |
|                | labs or TTE     | necrosis: RV   |                |
|                |                 | strain on TTE  |                |
|                |                 | (ex: D-sign),  |                |
|                |                 | BNP \>150,     |                |
|                |                 | trop \>0.05    |                |
+----------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+
| Management     | Start           | Provide        | Provide        |
|                | anticoagulation | hemodynamic    | hemodynamic    |
|                |                 | support,       | support.       |
|                | LWH or heparin  | monitor for    |                |
|                | gtt (if renal   | decompensation | Start AC w/    |
|                | impairment)     |                | unfractionated |
|                |                 | Start AC w/    | heparin gtt    |
|                | Rivaroxaban &   | unfractionated |                |
|                | apixaban can be | heparin gtt    | Page CCU       |
|                | used as initial |                | fellow STAT.   |
|                | management.     | STAT consult   |                |
|                | Edoxaban &      | cardiology for | Discuss with   |
|                | dabigatran can  | consideration  | cardiology     |
|                | be used after   | of catheter    | catheter       |
|                | 5-10d of        | directed       | directed       |
|                | parenteral      | thrombolysis   | thrombolysis   |
|                | therapy         | (EKOS) or      | (EKOS) or      |
|                |                 | embolectomy    | embolectomy    |
+----------------+-----------------+----------------+----------------+

tPA Considerations

-   Most effective within 24 hours but effective up to 14d

-   Contraindications:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Absolute:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CNS Pathology: hemorrhagic or ischemic CVA within 3mo, AVM, CNS
    neoplasm, recent surgery

-   Trauma: Recent head trauma w/ fx or injury

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Relative

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Surgery: surgery w/in 3wks

-   Heme: active bleeding, bleeding diathesis, plt \< 100, oral AC

-   Age: \>75yo, dementia

    Long-term management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Anticoagulation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NOAC - Remember to give initial loading dose (duration of load
    varies with each agent)

-   Warfarin (Coumadin): Goal INR 2-3, requires frequent monitoring

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Need to bridge with heparin or lovenox

-   Pharmacy consult, and will need to be set up with coumadin clinic at
    the time of dc

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IVC filter: only if AC is contraindicated, bleeding risk
    unacceptably high, recurrent PE despite optimal AC (placed by IR or
    Interventional cards)

    Duration of Anticoagulation:

-   Major reversible/transient risk factors (surgery, trauma): 3-6
    months

-   Idiopathic, unprovoked, or with less compelling risk factors: 12
    months

-   Major permanent risk factors (cancer, homozygote F5L or prothrombin
    gene mutation, APLS, protein C/S deficiencies, AT III deficiency):
    At least 1 year, preferably lifelong.

-   Recurrent DVT/PE: lifelong

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider etiology of recurrent VTE: cancer screenings, family hx of
    hypercoagulable disorders, features of autoimmune disease

Syncope -- Sarah Myers

Background

-   Definition: abrupt, transient loss of consciousness with rapid &
    spontaneous recovery  

-   Presyncope -- symptoms occurring before syncope including
    lightheadedness, tunnel vision/other visual disturbances

    Classification

-   Cardiac syncope 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tachyarrhythmias: VT, SVT 

-   Bradyarrhythmias: sinus node dysfunction, AV blocks (high grade) 

-   Structural: Aortic Stenosis, HCM, cardiac tamponade, congenital
    anomalies, masses/tumors 

-   Vascular: Pulmonary embolism, aortic dissection, severe pHTN 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Noncardiac syncope

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Reflex mediated

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Vasovagal; most common form of reflex mediated syncope

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can occur sitting/standing or with trigger (stress, pain, medical
    settings)

-   Classically has prodrome of nausea, diaphoresis, tunnel vision
    followed by hypotension and/or bradycardia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Situational (micturition/defecation/coughing)

-   Carotid sinus sensitivity syndrome

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Orthostatic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Medications (diuretics, nitrates/CCB/alpha blockers, TCAs)

-   Volume depletion (hemorrhage, dehydration)

-   Autonomic dysfunction

    Differential diagnosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Seizure, stroke, metabolic derangements, Intoxication/withdrawal,
    hypoglycemia, head trauma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   With rare exceptions, these do not result in complete LOC with
    spontaneous recovery

    Evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hx and physical are essential for evaluation of a syncopal event 

-   Characteristics associated with cardiac syncope 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Male, \>60, known structural/ischemic heart disease, brief/no
    prodrome, syncope while supine/at rest or during exercise, family hx
    of SCD/premature death, abnormal exam, abnormal baseline ECG

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Characteristics associated with noncardiac syncope

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Younger age, syncope while standing or with positional changes,
    prodrome (nausea, vomiting, warmth), specific triggers, previous
    episodes that have been similar, normal baseline ECG

    Workup

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   EKG on all pts with syncope, monitor those who are admitted on
    telemetry

-   CBC, CMP, troponin, BNP (If cardiac cause suspected), POC glucose,
    UDS, orthostatic VS

-   EEG and neuroimaging if concern for seizure activity or focal neuro
    deficit  

-   TTE and consider stress testing particularly in exertional syncope  

Management -- dependent on suspected cause of syncope

-   Cardiac; managed as indicated based on pathology 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If arrhythmia is suspected but not captured on admission, consider
    discharge with event monitor  

-   Monitoring duration should be equal to or greater than the frequency
    of events (e.g. If the symptoms occur roughly once a month,
    monitoring duration should be at least a month)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Noncardiac

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Reflex

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Vasovagal -- consider tilt table testing If recurrent or diagnosis
    not clear

-   Situational -- mainly avoiding triggers

-   Carotid sinus syndrome- may require PPM

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Orthostatic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Medication related

    -   Appropriate to hold potentially offending medications
        (diuretics, vasodilators) during evaluation

    -   Monitor for worsening supine hypertension, arrhythmias, or heart
        failure when holding

-   Volume depletion; resuscitate as appropriate

-   Autonomic dysfunction: see autonomics section

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Driving: TN law does not require any MD to inform the state of TLOC 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Should still recommend pts not drive while wok-up ongoing. Document
    all conversations about driving with pts

Valvular Heart Disease -- Audrey White

Aortic Stenosis -- Chloe Carr

Etiology

-   Degenerative calcification of the aortic cusps

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Congenital bicuspid aortic valve

-   Chronic deterioration (calcific)

-   Prior rheumatic fever/inflammation

    Presentation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Usually asymptomatic

-   Angina, syncope, exertional dyspnea, heart failure (HF carries worse
    prognosis) when severe

-   Typically aged 70--80 yo; if bicuspid aortic valve expect 10-20 yrs
    earlier

-   Physical exam: Systolic crescendo-decrescendo murmur that radiates
    towards the carotids

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Late peaking murmur, faint or absent S2, or delayed carotid upstroke
    suggest severe AS

    Evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TTE with doppler is test of choice

+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Severity    | Valve Area  | Mean        | Velocity    | Indexed     |
|             | (cm^2^)     | Gradient    |             | Valve Area  |
|             |             | (mmHg)      | (m/s)       | (           |
|             |             |             |             | cm^2^/m^2^) |
|             |             |             |             |             |
+=============+=============+=============+=============+=============+
| Mild        | \>1.5       | \<20        | 2.0-2.9     | \>0.85      |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Moderate    | 1.0-1.5     | 20-39       | 3.0-3.9     | 0.60-0.85   |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Severe      | \<1.0       | \>40        | \>4.0       | \<0.6       |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+
| Critical    | \<0.5       | \--         | \--         | \--         |
+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+-------------+

AS stages

-   A: at risk of AS (those with bicuspid anatomy or calcification

-   B: Asymptomatic non-severe AS

-   C: asymptomatic AS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   C1: normal EF

-   C2: abnormal EF

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   This stage might benefit from exercise or stress testing to elicit
    symptoms

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   D: Symptomatic AS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Some with symptomatic AS might not have enough LV reserve to produce
    high velocities and gradients (ex EF of 10% w/ critical valve area)
    = low flow/low gradient AS; consider dobutamine to unmask AS

    Management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   No proven effective medical therapy

-   Definitive treatment is valve replacement for:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stage D

-   Stage C with inducible symptoms on stress testing, low EF, or
    undergoing other cardiac procedure

-   Rapid progression (increase in velocity \>0.3m/sec per year)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consult cardiac surgery for determination of SAVR vs TAVR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In general, high risk surgical pts benefit most from TAVR

-   At VUMC: If determined to be intermediate to high operative risk by
    Cardiac Surgery, they will often recommend contacting the TAVR team
    for evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid rapid hemodynamic shifts and aggressive changes in preload or
    afterload

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Aim for normotension: avoid preferential vasodilators such as
    hydralazine or nitroglycerin

-   Significant vasodilation may ↓ coronary filling pressures -\>
    myocardial ischemia

    Monitoring:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Severe AS: TTE q 6-12 months

-   Moderate AS: TTE q 1-2 years

-   Mild AS: TTE q 3-5 years

    Post AVR anticoagulation

-   All pts will get 3-6 months of AC s/p AVR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Continued duration based on type of AVR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bioprosthetic (TAVR and some SAVRs): antiplatelets alone after
    Initial AC

-   Mechanical: lifelong AC with warfarin only

Aortic Regurgitation -- Hannah Granger 

Etiology

-   Primary valve disease (rheumatic disease, bicuspid aortic valve,
    infective endocarditis, syphilis)

-   Primary aortic root disease (medial degeneration, aortic dissection,
    Marfan's syndrome, bicuspid aortic valve, syphilis, non-syndromic
    familial)

    Presentation

-   Acute AR: LV cannot respond to increased volume to maintain stroke
    volume🡪 pulmonary edema and cardiogenic shock

-   Chronic AR: indolent presentation, often pt will develop symptoms of
    heart failure including DoE, orthopnea, PND

-   Physical exam: "Water-hammer" pulses, wide pulse pressure, laterally
    displaced PMI, high pitched "blowing" decrescendo murmur best heard
    at third intercostal space at left sternal border, S3

    Management

-   Acute severe AR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Page cardiac surgery for urgent surgical repair

-   Vasodilators such as nitroprusside and diuretics can be used to
    stabilize pt

-   Though pts with aortic dissection are often treated with beta
    blockers, these should be used with caution if there is concomitant
    severe AR as it may block compensatory tachycardia and lead to
    marked hypotension  

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Chronic severe AR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Medical management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Early symptoms of exercise intolerance can be treated with diuretics

-   Systolic BP should also be controlled with goal SBP \< 140 in
    chronic AR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Repeat imaging should be performed 3-6 month to assess for depressed
    LVEF or LV dilation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stages of Chronic AR: Ranging from Stage (A): Asymptomatic but "At
    Risk" AR to Stage (D) Symptomatic Severe AR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If symptoms are present then it is automatically Stage D, otherwise
    progression through stages is determined by AR jet width

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Class I indications for valve repair:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stage D (Symptomatic)

-   Stage C (Asymptomatic Severe AR) with LVEF \< 55%

-   Severe AR and undergoing cardiac surgery for other indication

Mitral Regurgitation -- Krissie Lobon

Etiology:

-   Primary MR -- caused by direct involvement of the valve apparatus
    (leaflets or chordae tendineae)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most common cause: Degenerative/myxomatous mitral valve disease
    (mitral valve prolapse with flail leaflet, mitral annular
    calcification, chordal rupture)

-   Rheumatic fever

-   Infective endocarditis

-   Papillary muscle rupture following acute (inferior) MI

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Secondary MR (also called functional MR)- caused by changes of the
    LV that lead to valvular incompetence

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dilated Cardiomyopathy

-   HOCM with systolic anterior motion

-   Coronary Artery Disease or prior MI leading to papillary muscle
    tethering

    Presentation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute MR- sudden onset reduction in forward cardiac flow and left
    atrial/pulmonary vein volume overload

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dyspnea with flash pulmonary edema

-   Left-sided heart failure

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Chronic MR- progressive symptoms d/t cardiac remodeling to
    compensate for mitral flow reversal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Progressively worsening heart failure: dyspnea, orthopnea, PND

-   LV dilation from volume overload

-   LA remodeling/dilation leading to afib

    Auscultation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Holosystolic murmur best heard at apex with radiation to the axilla

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Frequently associated with S3 filling sound, minimal respiratory
    variation

-   Murmur may be absent in acute MR due to large regurgitant
    orifice/low velocity regurgitant jet

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Increases w/ increased preload or afterload

    Evaluation

-   CXR: assess for pulmonary edema, typically normal cardiac silhouette
    in acute MR. Cardiomegaly and LA enlargement in chronic MR.

-   ECG: often non-specific if chronic LA enlargement notable on p wave
    morphology (p-mitrale). Chronic MR often c/b development of atrial
    fibrillation.

-   Echocardiography needed for confirming diagnosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TEE, CMR, or cardiac catheterization performed when insufficient or
    discordant information from TTE. TEE used to guide MV interventions

    Chronic MR stages

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   A: At risk for MR due to risk factors (i.e. mild valve thickening or
    leaflet restriction)

-   B: Progressive MR w/o hemodynamic changes or symptoms

-   C: Asymptomatic severe MR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   C1: preserved EF and normal LV size

-   C2: reduced EF (\<60%), dilated LV (LVESD \> 40mm)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   D: Symptomatic severe MR

Management\
Asymptomatic severe MR (stage C)

-   Should have follow-up echo every 6-12 months to monitor LV
    function/size and pulmonary pressure

    Acute hemodynamically significant MR

-   Urgent surgical repair or replacement

-   Medical stabilization as a bridge to surgery:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Afterload reduction with vasodilation (nitroprusside,
    nitroglycerine) is key to promote forward flow

-   Diuresis to reduce preload and improve pulmonary edema

Chronic severe primary MR🡪Surgical repair favored over valve replacement

[2020 ACC/AHA Heart Valve Disease Guidelines: Mitral Regurgitation
Management
Algorithm](https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000923#d1e7466)

Mitral Stenosis -- Krissie Lobon

Etiology -- characterized by thickened mitral valve leaflets and fused
leaflet tips

-   Rheumatic Fever (leading cause worldwide)

-   Calcification of the mitral valve annulus (common in high income
    countries)

-   Autoimmune Diseases: SLE, Rheumatoid arthritis

    Presentation

-   Progressive symptoms: Asymptomatic 🡪 Heart Failure

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Orthopnea

-   PND

-   Hoarseness/Dysphagia (compression of recurrent laryngeal
    nerve/esophagus by enlarged left atrium from pressure overload)

-   Symptoms of Right Heart Failure

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute Symptoms may present in settings of increased cardiac output
    (pregnancy, sepsis, or exercise) or tachyarrhythmias

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dyspnea

-   Fatigue

-   Palpitations

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Physical exam

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Low-pitched rumbling, diastolic Murmur, best heard at apex,
    low-pitched, rum

    -   Loud S1, opening snap after S2

    -   Prominent P2 if pulmonary HTN develops

-   Pulmonary Rales

    Stages of MS

    A: At risk of MS, characterized by mild valve doming during
    diastole, asymptomatic

    B: Progressive MS, characterized by commissural fusion, increased
    transmitral flow velocities, asymptomatic

    C: Asymptomatic Severe MS, characterized by above + mitral valve
    area \<1.5cm2

    D: Symptomatic Severe MS, characterized by above criteria +
    decreased exercise tolerance

    Evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CXR: LA enlargement, increased pulmonary vasculature

-   Echocardiography: thickening of mitral valve leaflets, decreased
    area of valve leaflets, left atrial enlargement

    Management

-   Varies between rheumatic MS and calcific MS (in general,
    intervention of calcific MS is challenging and high risk)

-   Severe, symptomatic rheumatic MS:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Percutaneous mitral balloon commissurotomy (PMBC)

-   Surgical repair/replacement if pt failed PMBC or undergoing other
    cardiac surgery

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Calcific MS has a poor prognosis with 5-year survival \<50%,
    Intervention is higher risk and should be reserved for severely
    symptomatic pts

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   No role for commissurotomy with calcific MS

-   Surgical valve replacement may be considered for severely
    symptomatic pts (technically challenging)

    Anti-Coagulation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Anti-coagulation is indicated if:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mechanical prosthetic mitral valve

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Warfarin, goal INR 3-4 lifelong

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bioprosthetic mitral valve replacement

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Warfarin, goal INR 2-3 for first 3-6 months

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Atrial Fibrillation regardless of CHADS2VASC score

    [2020 ACC/AHA Heart Valve Disease Guidelines: Mitral Stenosis
    Management
    Algorithm](https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/10.1161/CIR.0000000000000923#d1e6762)

Critical Care

Editors: Alexandra Flemington, MD, Catherine Chu, MD

Reviewed by Todd Rice, MD

Definition of Shock -- Jonathan Napper

"Shock is the clinical expression of circulatory failure that results in
inadequate cellular oxygen utilization." *-- Jean-Louis Vincent, M.D.,
Ph.D., and Daniel De Backer, M.D., Ph.D.*

Subtypes (further outlined below):

-   Distributive (septic, anaphylactic, neurogenic, and rarely adrenal)

-   Cardiogenic (cardiomyopathies, arrhythmias, severe valvular
    diseases)

-   Hypovolemic (bleeding, volume deplete states)

-   Obstructive (PE, tension PTX, cardiac tamponade, restrictive
    cardiomyopathies, constrictive pericarditis)

    Signs:

-   Systolic BP \< 90 mmHg or MAP \< 70 mmHg, with associated
    tachycardia AND

-   Clinical signs of tissue hypoperfusion.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cutaneous (cold, clammy skin w/vasoconstriction and cyanosis,
    evident in low-flow states)

-   Renal (UOP of \<0.5ml/kg of body weight/hr)

-   Neurologic (AMS typically with obtundation, disorientation,
    confusion)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hyperlactatemia (indicates abnormal cellular oxygen metabolism)

Management of Shock -- Alex Toporek, Soibhan Kelley

Cardiogenic Shock

Background

-   Pathophysiology: CO/CI decreased, SVR increased, PCWP and RAP
    elevated (left heart failure) or PCWP low/normal and RAP elevated
    (right heart failure)

-   Etiologies: Cardiomyopathy (LHF, RHF or biventricular), arrhythmia,
    mechanical such as acute AR (ex: dissection) or MR (ex: ruptured
    papillary muscle)

    Presentation

-   Edematous, elevated JVP, "cold and wet"; hypoxia w/crackles and pulm
    edema on CXR; mixed venous sat \< 50-60%; POCUS with plump,
    non-compressible IVC, reduced EF, and B-lines

Management -- see cardiogenic shock in cardiology section

Distributive Shock

Background

-   Pathophysiology: severe, peripheral vasodilation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CO/CI increased, SVR decreased, PCWP and RAP normal to low

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Etiologies: sepsis (most common), anaphylaxis, neurogenic, adrenal
    insufficiency, pancreatitis

-   Signs/symptoms:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sepsis: localizing signs of infection; tachycardia, tachypnea, may
    be hypo/hyperthermic; POCUS with hyperdynamic cardiac function

-   Anaphylaxis: history of anaphylaxis; urticaria, edema, diarrhea,
    wheezing on exam

-   Neurogenic: history of CNS trauma; focal neurologic deficits on exam

-   Adrenal insufficiency: hx chronic steroid use, may have GI symptoms,
    hyponatremia (common), hyperkalemia (rare), hypoglycemia,
    hypo/hyperthermia, NAGMA

-   Pancreatitis: abdominal pain, elevated lipase, evidence on CT scan

    Management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sepsis: see sepsis section

-   Anaphylaxis: 0.3mg IM epinephrine ASAP to be repeated q5-15min x 3;
    after third IM epi, consider IVF and epi gtt if persistent
    hypotension. Adjuncts: albuterol nebs for bronchospasm, H1 and H2
    blockers, +/- glucocorticoids (methylprednisolone 1mg/kg).
    EPINEPHRINE SAVES LIVES.

-   Neurogenic: caution with IVF resuscitation, can worsen cerebral and
    spinal cord edema; preferred pressors are norepinephrine and
    phenylephrine; for neurogenic shock 2/2 spinal cord pathology,
    consider higher MAP goal 85-90 mmHg

-   Adrenal insufficiency: stress dose steroids with hydrocortisone
    100mg IV q8h or 50mg q6h

-   Pancreatitis: IVF + pressors; trend H/H and Ca; treat complications
    (necrotizing pancreatitis, abdominal compartment syndrome); address
    underlying etiology (see GI section)

Hypovolemic Shock

Background

-   Etiologies: Hemorrhagic and non-hemorrhagic

-   Signs/symptoms:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hemorrhagic: Common sources include GI, retroperitoneal (\*needs
    high index of suspicion), traumatic, intraabdominal, thighs, thorax.

-   Non-hemorrhagic: 2/2 GI losses or decreased PO intake

-   POCUS with thin, collapsible IVC

    Management (Hemorrhagic)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ensure good access with two large-bore (at least 18G) Ivs ideally in
    AC or above; Cordis or MAC CVC (can also use dialysis catheter, if
    necessary)

-   Hyperacute bleed:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   1:1:1 ratio FFP:Plt:RBC (balanced resuscitation), trauma blood
    (fastest way to get RBCs); massive transfusion protocol (MTP)

-   Monitor iCa and replete (citrated blood products will deplete Ca)

-   Minimize crystalloid if possible, w/primary use to prevent immediate
    hemodynamic collapse (contributes to coagulopathy, hypothermia,
    acidemia, trauma/surgery)

-   Permissive hypotension until source control/transfusions with
    arterial bleeds (high MAP/SBP -\> clot destabilization); trend POC
    lactate/exam to guide

-   Acute traumatic arterial bleed or post-partum hemorrhage consider
    TXA (1-2g bolus)

-   Reverse anticoagulation, if applicable

-   Vasopressors -\> generally poorly effective, would start with
    norepinephrine

-   Source control -\> GI, IR, or EGS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Variceal bleed: See GI Bleeding section for specific management

    Management (Non-Hemorrhagic)

-   Aggressive IVF resuscitation (balanced crystalloid); target MAP ≥65

-   Can support BP during resuscitation with pressors (usually
    norepinephrine)

    Obstructive Shock See dedicated section below

Obstructive Shock -- Seth Alexander

Background

-   Obstructive shock occurs when there is increased resistance to
    forward blood flow which can occur due to:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Resistance in the cardiovascular circuit (i.e., pulmonary embolism,
    HOCM, critical aortic stenosis)

-   Extrinsic compression on the heart (i.e., pericardial tamponade,
    tension pneumothorax, dynamic hyperinflation (auto-PEEP),
    restrictive cardiomyopathy)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Risk factors vary based on the underlying pathology but include:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PE: Known DVT, prothrombotic conditions, malignancy, recent
    orthopedic surgery

-   Pneumothorax: Recent chest trauma/thoracic procedures, mechanical
    ventilation, COPD/emphysema, endobronchial valve placement

-   Tamponade: Recent cardiac procedure, ESRD, cancer, trauma

    Clinical Signs/Symptoms

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   General: Hypotension, tachycardia, hypoxemia, elevated JVP

-   Tension pneumothorax: Unilateral breath sounds, tracheal deviation
    away from the pneumothorax, CXR with one lung collapsed, and
    mediastinal shift away from the PTX

-   Pulmonary embolism: Right heart strain on EKG (right axis deviation,
    S1Q3T3, ST depressions in inferior leads/precordial leads, new
    RBBB), chest pain, hypoxia, sense of impending doom

-   Cardiac tamponade: distant heart sounds (Beck's Triad with JVD and
    hypotension), electrical alternans, and/or low amplitude on EKG

-   POCUS findings:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PE/causes of increased heart pressures: distended IVC, RV dilation,
    McConnell's sign, Septal D sign

-   Pneumothorax: Lack of lung sliding

-   Cardiac tamponade: Diastolic collapse of the RV, large pericardial
    effusion

    Approach in the Hemodynamically Unstable Patient

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Initial workup: order:

-   STAT CBC, EKG, troponin, VBG, CXR. Evaluate the patient at bedside
    and bring an ultrasound if available to perform POCUS.

-   Pulmonary Embolism -- STAT CTA chest, supportive measures (pressors,
    supplemental O2), and activate PERC team for discussion regarding
    mechanical thrombectomy or chemical thrombolysis. Start high-dose
    therapeutic heparin gtt once clot has been identified -- bolus
    unless contraindicated (i.e., recent GI bleed).

-   NOTE: First line is LMWH due to faster onset of action and longer
    time in therapeutic range. At VUMC, we often start heparin gtt first
    because if pt is going for EKOS, they need to be able to turn off AC
    quickly. We recommend starting heparin gtt until decision for EKOS
    has been made. If no EKOS, switch to LMWH.

-   Cardiac tamponade -- emergency procedural management with
    cardiothoracic surgery (pericardiocentesis vs drain). 500cc-1L IVF
    bolus can improve preload and temporarily improve cardiac output.

-   Tension pneumothorax -- if there is no lung sliding on POCUS or the
    STAT CXR shows evidence of tension PTX, emergent needle
    decompression (14-gauge needle in either the 2^nd^ intercostal space
    mid-clavicular line or the 4^th^/5^th^ intercostal space anterior
    axillary line) vs urgent chest tube placement with pulmonology (if
    at the VA overnight, ED attending can place one).

    Further Evaluation and Management

-   Pulmonary Embolism

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Evaluate the source for the embolism (four extremity dopplers)

-   If no risk factors for VTE are identified, you could consider a
    benign hematology outpatient referral for a hypercoagulable work-up.

-   See "Pulmonary Embolism" in cardiology for more information

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cardiac Tamponade, HOCM, and Critical Aortic Stenosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Formal echo should be obtained at some point during the admission.

-   These are all worsened by a drop in the patient's preload; AVOID
    diuretics or other medications which may worsen obstructive
    pathophysiology if possible.

-   Preload support (IVF, dobutamine in AS) can help temporize patients
    pending medical or procedural interventions.

-   Consultation to cardiology and/or cardiothoracic surgery is
    warranted to discuss management.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For more on management of aortic stenosis, see "Valvular Heart
    Disease" in Cardiology Section

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tension Pneumothorax

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Once stabilized, consult to pulmonology for chest tube placement is
    indicated in large, hemodynamically significant pneumothorax to
    ensure resolution.

-   For more on chest tubes, see "Chest Tubes" in Pulmonary.

Sepsis -- Jacob Lee

Definitions (Sepsis 3):

-   Sepsis: organ dysfunction (change in total SOFA score ≥ 2 points)
    from dysregulated host response to infection

-   Septic shock: sepsis + vasopressor requirement to maintain MAP ≥ 65
    mmHg + serum lactate \> 2 mEq/dL despite adequate volume
    resuscitation

    Evaluation: Early screening for/identification of infection

-   Screening: preferably incorporate multiple

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   SIRS, NEWS, MEWS superior to qSOFA as single-agent-screening tools
    (more sensitive)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   SIRS Criteria:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  RR \>20/min,
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  T \<36 C or \> 38C

  HR \>90 bpm

  WBC \<4 or \>12x10\^9/L or \>10% bands
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

-   SOFA (more specific): PaO2/FiO2, Thrombocytopenia,
    Hyperbilirubinemia, Hypotension, AMS, Kidney Injury, UOP.

-   Source Evaluation: Cultures before starting antibiotics is
    preferred. However, do not delay antibiotics for cultures if unable
    to obtain them promptly. Blood cx x2 (preferably from peripheral
    veins via venipuncture), Urine cx

-   Consider sputum cx, wound cx, other body fluid cx (thoracentesis,
    paracentesis, LP, joint aspiration) based on clinical picture

-   Make sure to do a full body physical exam to assess for SSTI/obvious
    wounds.

-   Limitations to source control: lines, drains, catheters, ports, etc.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Labs: Lactate, CBC w/ diff, BMP, HFP

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider DIC labs for septic shock (LDH, Haptoglobin, Fibrinogen,
    PT, PTT, INR)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Imaging: X-ray, CT, or US depending on suspected source

    Management: after screening, early antibiotic administration and
    fluid resuscitation

-   Antibiotics: earlier the better (septic shock -- within 1 hour;
    sepsis alone -- within 3 hours)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Empiric treatments: should target organisms based on suspected
    source

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Include MRSA coverage (vancomycin/daptomycin (unless PNA
    suspected)/linezolid/ceftaroline) - if risk factors for MRSA
    (previous MRSA infection, known MRSA colonization, close contact
    with MRSA, cavitation on CXR, dialysis, immunosuppressed, recent
    antibiotics, recent hospitalization)

-   Pseudomonas coverage not always needed, but generally preferred for
    sicker patients (zosyn/cefepime/gentamicin) with MDR risk factors
    (recent antibiotics, recent hospitalization, immunosuppression,
    hemodialysis).

-   Fungal coverage: fluconazole/micafungin if high risk for candida
    (neutropenic, receiving TPN, abdominal surgery, recent antibiotic
    usage, \>1 site of colonization), voriconazole/itraconazole if high
    risk for aspergillus (asthma with hemoptysis, nodules/cavitations on
    lung imaging), liposomal amphotericin if high risk for
    mucor/Rhizopus or disseminated crypto (uncontrolled DM with sinus
    pain/proptosis, uncontrolled HIV, immunosuppression with nodules on
    lung imaging)

-   MDR coverage: if prior MDR infection (-penem) or high risk (dual
    Gram-Negative coverage)

    -   If in the ICU ID approval is not needed for meropenem. If on the
        floor, there is an antibiotic approval pharmacist that can be
        paged for meropenem.

-   Anaerobic coverage: recommended for lung abscess or empyema (IDSA
    Guidelines), intra-abdominal infection, not recommended (new IDSA
    guidelines), but in some instances may consider for aspiration PNA
    (low quality evidence, guidelines mixed)
    (flagyl/zosyn/Unasyn/clindamycin)

-   Atypical coverage: consider if concern for community respiratory
    source (azithromycin/Levaquin/doxy); should be given to any patient
    admitted to ICU for community-acquired pneumonia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Source Control: If unable to find source despite routine imaging,
    could consider PET vs tagged WBC scan.

-   De-escalation: When source control obtained, use susceptibilities,
    and clinical evaluation to decide how and when to de-escalate and
    discontinue antimicrobials; procalcitonin trend may also be helpful
    in certain clinical situations

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fluids: initial resuscitation at least 30 mL/kg (ideal body weight)
    of balanced IV crystalloid fluid (prefer LR \> NS) should be given
    within the first 3 hours. General rule of thumb is to give at least
    1-3L.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Assess fluid responsiveness with an intravascular volume assessment
    (leg raise, US IVC, pulse pressure); important for addressing need
    for vasopressors but limited in overall predictive ability

-   Blood: when Hb \< 7, unless otherwise indicated (Hb \<8 for CAD,
    brisk bleed suspected)

    Post-Resuscitation Management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Access -- if in shock, hemodynamic monitoring with arterial line is
    preferred; will need central access to run pressors (can run them
    peripherally if line is above the AC, levo is less than 15 mcg/min,
    and if needing for \<48 hours).

-   Vasopressors: start if MAPs persistently \< 65 mmHg after fluid
    resuscitation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Via CVC, PICC, or Port, or peripherally briefly

-   Target MAP ≥ 65 mmHg using lactic acid as guide to adequate
    perfusion

-   1^st^ Line NE, 2^nd^ Line Vasopressin, 3^rd^ Line Epi, 4^th^ Line
    Dopamine

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   SOAP II Trial: NE \> Dopamine (less arrhythmias)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other options:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Phenylephrine-may be useful in tachyarrhythmias to slow HR. Also
    comes in the code cart which makes this a good option if other
    pressors aren't immediately available

-   Ang II -contraindicated in patients with CHF, VTE/hypercoagulable,
    thrombocytopenia \<50k, severe bronchospasm

-   Ang II needs approval from MICU director for order

-   Low CO: dobutamine + NE OR Epi single agent

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Need ulcer prophylaxis w/ PPI (preferably PO if possible)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Steroids: persistent septic shock w/ ongoing pressor requirements,
    add IV corticosteroids (particularly beneficial in ARDS, severe CAP)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hydrocortisone 100 mg q8 or 50 mg q6 IV +/- fludrocortisone 50 µg
    (if concerned for adrenal insufficiency) enteral daily for 7 d or
    until ICU discharge

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Additional management:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NaHCO3 -- may be useful if pH ≤ 7.1

-   Early enteral nutrition (within 72 hours) if possible, would start
    at a trickle / trophic rate

-   AVOID beta-blockers unless you think HR compromising cardiac output
    by limiting diastolic filling/lack of atrial kick in afib; this is a
    physiologic compensatory response

Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS) -- JC Armstrong

Background

-   A syndrome of diffuse systemic inflammation which damages the
    alveoli/capillary endothelium interface causing fluid and protein
    accumulation within the interstitium and alveoli leading to impaired
    gas exchange, decreased lung compliance, and pulmonary hypertension.

-   **ARDS new definition:** Onset within 1 week of known insult with
    new/worsening respiratory status with bilateral opacities seen on
    CXR/CT or bedside US not fully explained by cardiac failure/volume
    overload with PaO2:FiO2 ≤ 300 or SpO2:FiO2 ≤ 315 with respiratory
    support of PEEP ≥ 5 or HFNC ≥ 30L.

    Triggers:

-   Direct

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pneumonia (viral and bacterial)

-   Aspiration

-   Lung contusion d/t trauma

-   Direct inhalation injury

-   Primary Graft dysfunction of pulmonary transplant

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indirect

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-pulmonary Sepsis (most common cause)

-   Massive Blood Transfusion/TRALI

-   Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation

-   Drugs (Opioids, TCAs, ASA, cocaine, amiodarone, chemotherapy,
    salicylates)

-   Pancreatitis

-   Burns

-   Radiation

    Evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Severity: Based on PaO2/FiO2 ratio with PEEP ≥ 5 cm H20

-   PaO2- arterial pressure of O2 (Obtained by ABG)

-   FiO2- Fraction of inspired oxygen (expressed as a decimal between
    0.21 and 1.0)

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                    **PaO2/FiO2       **SpO2/FiO2 (if   **PEEP or HFNC
                    ratio**           SpO2 ≤ 97%) if    (Optiflow)**
                                      intubated**       
  ----------------- ----------------- ----------------- -----------------
  Mild              300-201           246-315           ³5 or ≥30L

  Moderate          200-101           149-245           ³5 or ≥30L

  Severe            \<100             \<148             ³5 or ≥30L
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Management

-   Frequently requires intubation as non-invasive ventilation is not
    often effective.

-   Interventions with mortality benefit

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Low tidal volume(Vt) ventilation (LTVV)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Goal Vt is 4-8 mL/kg of ideal body weight

-   Target plateau pressure of ≤ 30 cm H2O

-   Oxygenation goal: PaO2 55-80 mmHg or SpO2 88-95%

-   Slowly titrate PEEP and FiO2 concurrently to achieve oxygenation
    goals

-   pH goal: ≥ 7.20; "permissive hypercapnia"

-   Treat ventilator dyssynchrony

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Proning

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can be considered if moderate to severe ARDS and oxygenation does
    not improve with LTVV

-   Most recent study (PROSEVA) suggested mortality benefit to proning
    patients with moderate to severe ARDS

-   Not routinely done at VUMC

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Interventions that probably won't hurt the patient but with less
    data to support them

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Conservative fluid management with IV diuresis as needed (at risk
    for pulmonary edema d/t vascular leak); goal of net even or
    negative. FACTT study demonstrated 2 more ventilator-free days with
    aggressive diuresis, but no mortality difference

-   Glucocorticoids in ARDS d/t septic shock, COVID, CAP,
    steroid-responsive conditions; may shorten time on ventilator but
    may also result in some neuromuscular weakness

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   American Thoracic Society Guidelines of 2024 placed emphasis on
    early ECMO involvement and neuromuscular blockade in severe ARDS
    patients. Two trials on neuromuscular blockade (ACURASYS and ROSE)
    with conflicting results. EOLIA suggest benefit to ECMO in patients
    with P/F \<80 or hypercapnic respiratory acidosis.

Introduction to Vent Management -- Jared Freitas

Ventilator Settings:

-   See above table in Modes of Oxygen Delivery for variables adjusted
    in each ventilator mode

-   Trigger: what initiates a breath; time, flow, or pressure (pt
    triggers are flow and pressure; ventilator breaths are trigged by
    time)

    Static Ventilator Readouts:

-   Plateau pressure (Pplat): measure with inspiratory hold, assesses
    static lung compliance

-   Auto-PEEP: measure with expiratory hold; occurs when volume of
    previous breath is not entirely expelled before the next breath is
    initiated

    Dynamic Ventilator Readouts:

-   Measured RR: in most modes, pt may trigger breaths above set RR; if
    set and measured RR match consider ↓ respiratory drive (sedation,
    neurologic injury) or iatrogenic over-ventilation

-   VTi / VTe: tidal volume of inspiration (VTi) and expiration (VTe)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   VTi should approximately equal VTe, if not then concern for air leak
    (e.g. cuff leak or pneumothorax) or auto-PEEP

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Minute ventilation: calculated from VTe x RR; higher MV = more CO2
    clearance

-   Peak pressure: highest pressure reached in the entire ventilator
    cycle

    Critical Non-ventilator hemodynamic readouts:

-   SpO2: if poor waveform or discordant with PaO2, may need serial ABG

-   HR: quickest indicator of emergencies such as pneumothorax, PE,
    ventilator disconnection

-   Blood pressure: positive pressure ventilation decreases preload and
    afterload; depending on the underlying pt physiology, increases in
    positive pressure may be detrimental or beneficial for BP

+-------------+--------------+----------------------------------------+
| Alarm Type  | What is      | Troubleshooting                        |
|             | causing the  |                                        |
|             | alarm?       |                                        |
+=============+==============+========================================+
| High Peak   | Static       | Step 1: Check plateau pressure by      |
| Pressure    | compliance   | performing inspiratory hold. Must be   |
|             | issue        | in VC mode.                            |
|             | (stretch of  |                                        |
|             | the lung -   | **High Peak and Low Plateau** =        |
|             | doesn't      | Dynamic compliance issue-\> High       |
|             | change with  | Resistance                             |
|             | airflow) vs  |                                        |
|             | dynamic      | -   Check circuit tubing for excess    |
|             | compliance   |     water condensation or a kink. Ask  |
|             | issue        |     RT to disconnect and clear circuit |
|             | (resistance  |                                        |
|             | of the       | -   Check if pt is biting ETT          |
|             | circuit when |                                        |
|             | there is air | -   Incline suction to clear           |
|             | flowing)     |     secretions or proximal mucous plug |
|             |              |                                        |
|             |              | -   Auscultate for wheezing/stridor to |
|             |              |     indicate bronchospasm or airway    |
|             |              |     obstruction-\>give bronchodilators |
|             |              |                                        |
|             |              | **High Peak and High Plateau** =       |
|             |              | Static compliance issue -\> Worsening  |
|             |              | alveolar process                       |
|             |              |                                        |
|             |              | Emergencies to quickly assess for:     |
|             |              |                                        |
|             |              | -   Tension PTX                        |
|             |              |                                        |
|             |              | -   Main stem intubation (ask about    |
|             |              |     any tube migration, listen to      |
|             |              |     breath sounds, CXR)                |
|             |              |                                        |
|             |              | ```{=html}                             |
|             |              | <!-- -->                               |
|             |              | ```                                    |
|             |              | -   Consider worsening alveolar        |
|             |              |     process leading to decreased lung  |
|             |              |     compliance: worsening pulmonary    |
|             |              |     edema, PNA, DAH, ARDS or other     |
|             |              |     non-alveolar process such as new   |
|             |              |     pleural effusion, obesity,         |
|             |              |     intraabdominal compartment         |
|             |              |     syndrome                           |
|             |              |                                        |
|             |              | ```{=html}                             |
|             |              | <!-- -->                               |
|             |              | ```                                    |
|             |              | -   CXR, b-lines, tracheal aspirate,   |
|             |              |     bronch, etc                        |
|             |              |                                        |
|             |              | -   Treat according to etiology (chest |
|             |              |     tube, reposition ETT, diuresis,    |
|             |              |     abx, etc)                          |
+-------------+--------------+----------------------------------------+
| Low Tidal   | Pt is not    | **Compare inspiratory tidal volumes    |
| Volume/Low  | getting the  | (Vti) with expiratory tidal volumes    |
| Minute      | desired      | (Vte) on the ventilator. If Vti\>Vte,  |
| Ventilation | tidal        | check for a leak in the system**       |
| (VE)        | volume/VE    |                                        |
|             | that was set | -   Have RT check all connections      |
|             | in the vent  |                                        |
|             | parameters.  | -   Listen for a cuff leak -- can have |
|             | The alarm    |     RT check a cuff pressure and if    |
|             | reports      |     low then re-inflate-\>sometimes    |
|             | exhaled VE.  |     need to do an ETT exchange         |
|             | May cause    |                                        |
|             | inadequate   | **If low tidal volumes and no leak     |
|             | ventilation, | (ie. Vti = Vte) and RR WNL**           |
|             | CO2          |                                        |
|             | retention,   | -   Pt may need more support, ie       |
|             | potentially  |     switching to a different vent mode |
|             | hypoxia      |     (PS to PRVC). Discuss with RT or   |
|             |              |     fellow                             |
|             |              |                                        |
|             |              | **If low RR and no leak and Vt at      |
|             |              | goal**                                 |
|             |              |                                        |
|             |              | -   Pt may be oversedated              |
|             |              |                                        |
|             |              | -   Ensure pt has a back-up rate in    |
|             |              |     case they aren't triggering the    |
|             |              |     vent-\>may need to switch vent     |
|             |              |     modes for this (i.e. take off      |
|             |              |     pressure support) or increase      |
|             |              |     set/ventilator respiratory rate    |
+-------------+--------------+----------------------------------------+
| Apnea       | No breaths   | \*\*\***Check that pt hasn't           |
|             | are being    | self-extubated, trach hasn't fallen    |
|             | triggered by | out, or been unhooked from             |
|             | the vent\    | vent\*\*\***                           |
|             | -\> your pt  |                                        |
|             | is NOT       | If self-extubated or tracheostomy      |
|             | breathing\   | decannulated, then immediately start   |
|             | -\> this is  | bagging the pt (may need to bag from   |
|             | an emergency | trach stoma if s/p laryngectomy). Have |
|             |              | nurse call staff assist for            |
|             |              | re-intubation if necessary or have     |
|             |              | trach team called to replace a fresh   |
|             |              | (\<7 days old) trach                   |
+-------------+--------------+----------------------------------------+

Intubation and Extubation - Daniel Motta-Calderon

Intubation

Background

-   Intubation is the definitive therapy for pts with worsening
    respiratory failure

-   Indications for intubation- hypoxic or hypercarbic respiratory
    failure, airway protection

    Intubation checklist

-   Prepare the pt

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IV access: at least two large bore IV access sites.

-   Optimize position: Supine sniffing position

-   Assess the airway: Assess for difficult intubation predictors
    (opening mouth \<3cm, Mallampati ≥ III, neck circumference \>40cm,
    thyromental distance \<6cm, head-neck extension \<30 degrees)

-   Optimal pre-oxygenation: using FiO2 100% (facemask, high flow nasal
    cannula)

-   Optimize medical status: resuscitation, temporize hyperkalemia, Hb
    \>7

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Prepare the equipment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Monitoring: SpO2, capnography, telemetry, BP

-   Equipment: bag valve mask, 2 endotracheal tubes (ETT) with cuffs
    checked, direct laryngoscope, videolaryngoscope, bougie/stylet,
    working suction, supraglottic airway, oropharyngeal airway

-   Medications: paralytic (ex: rocuronium, succinylcholine), induction
    sedative (ex: etomidate, ketamine, propofol), analgesics (ex:
    fentanyl), maintenance sedative, IVF hanging in room, pressors (ex:
    Neostick)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Prepare the team

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   First and second intubators, RT, RN, someone to monitor hemodynamics

    Rapid-sequence intubation (RSI)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Preferred method of induction, associated with increased
    first-attempt success and fewer intubation-related complications

-   Simultaneous IV administration of rapidly acting paralytic and
    induction agents to achieve sedation and paralysis

    Post-intubation:

-   Ensure correct placement of ETT with capnography and confirming
    bilateral breath sounds

-   Secure ETT with taping, tying or tube holder

-   Obtain post-placement CXR

    Immediate complications of intubation:

-   Aspiration: Suction airway, ideally prior to initiation of positive
    pressure ventilation to prevent distal movement of aspirated
    contents. Cricoid pressure maneuver historically used to reduce risk
    but unclear if it works so often not performed

-   Cardiovascular collapse: May be hypotension or sympathetic surge
    (hypertension, tachycardia, arrhythmias). Manage with
    fluids/pressors if need, rule out other causes (ex: hypoxia, PTX)

-   Hypoxemia: Preoxygenate with 100% FiO2 to minimize risk. Rescue
    maneuvers with bag mask ventilation if needed

-   Mechanical injury: Dental, soft tissue, tracheal, laryngeal.
    Retrieve any dislodged teeth, suction blood

Extubation

-   Are they oxygenating well? SpO2 ≥90% with FiO2 ≤50% and PEEP ≤8cm
    H20

-   Has the underlying cause of their respiratory failure improved?

-   Did pt pass their SBT?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   See ABCDEF Bundle section for details on SBT

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Is pt able to protect their airway?

-   Is the pt on a stable pressor requirement or no pressors?

-   Is pt coughing and clearing secretions?

-   Is pt off sedation, alert and following commands?

-   Positive cuff leak? (See below for steps)

-   Consider calculating the rapid shallow breathing index (RSBI):
    RR/tidal volume (L)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Set PS at 0cm H2O, and PEEP at 5cm H2O and, measure VT & RR for one
    minute.

-   RSBI ≥ 105 predicts likely failure to wean. The use of a RSBI is
    attending dependent.

    Complications post extubation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Post-extubation stridor: 2/2 laryngeal edema

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Positive cuff leak test= high risk-\> methylprednisolone 20mg IV Q4H
    for 4 doses prior to extubation to prevent

-   If after extubation: methylprednisolone 40mg IV + inhaled racemic
    epinephrine. If stridor \>60minutes, consider reintubation

-   Cuff leak test:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Suction secretions and set the ventilator into the AC mode

-   Inflate the cuff and record inspiratory and expiratory VT to
    evaluate for differences between the two volumes

-   Deflate the cuff-\> record the expiratory VT over the next six
    breathing cycles. Average the three lowest expiratory VT values

-   The cuff leak volume is the difference between the inspiratory VT
    (measured before the cuff was deflated) and the averaged expiratory
    VT. If the difference is \<100cc, this is considered failure but is
    not an absolute contradiction to extubation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Post-extubation respiratory failure

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Recurrent hypoxic or hypercarbic respiratory failure

-   Assess for aggravating factors (volume overload, shock, AMS, etc.)

-   For hypercarbic respiratory failure, may trial BiPAP. If
    unsuccessful 🡪reintubate

-   Preventative post-extubation BiPAP not routinely used in all pts but
    *consider* in select populations at high risk for failure: severe
    COPD with preexisting chronic hypercarbia, cardiogenic pulmonary
    edema

Modes of Oxygen Delivery -- Blake Funke

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  System                 L/min         \% O2        Comments
  ---------------------- ------------- ------------ ----------------------
  Blow by (ex: Trach                   21-100%      
  collar)                                           

  Nasal cannula          1-8           25 -- 45%    

  Large bore nasal       Up to 15      Up to 65%    Can be identified by
  cannula                                           larger bore tubing
                                                    (often green) and nose
                                                    piece. Colloquially
                                                    referred to as HFNC at
                                                    VUMC, but true HFNC =
                                                    optiflow

  Venturi mask           4 to 15       24 -- 50%    Actual FiO2 is
                                                    dependent on pt effort

  Non-rebreather         10 to 15      65-95%       Often used as a bridge
                                                    to higher level of O2
                                                    therapy

  HFNC: Optiflow, AirVo, Up to 60      30-100%      Delivers 0.5-1 cm/H2O
  Vapotherm                                         of PEEP per 10L of
                                                    flow
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

\*\* Use of all of the above modes of O2 requires a spontaneously
breathing pt

Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation:

-   CPAP

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indications: obstructive sleep apnea, tracheomalacia

-   Settings: CPAP, FiO2

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   BiPAP

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indications: hypercapnic respiratory failure (RF), hypoxic RF,
    pulmonary edema, obstructive sleep apnea, obesity hypoventilation
    syndrome, RF 2/2 neuromuscular disease

-   Settings: IPAP, EPAP, FiO2, RR (sometimes)

+------------+------------+----------+--------------------------------+
| Invasive   |            |          |                                |
| positiv    |            |          |                                |
| e-pressure |            |          |                                |
| v          |            |          |                                |
| entilation |            |          |                                |
+============+============+==========+================================+
| Mode       | You set    | Not set  | Comments                       |
+------------+------------+----------+--------------------------------+
| Pressure   | PEEP       | TV       | Similar to Bipap. Frequently   |
| support    |            |          | used for vent weaning / SBT.   |
| (PS)       | PS above   | RR       | Requires spontaneously         |
|            | PEEP       |          | breathing pt                   |
|            |            | Ins      |                                |
|            | FiO2       | piratory |                                |
|            |            | flow     |                                |
+------------+------------+----------+--------------------------------+
| Volume     | PEEP       | Ins      | Mandates a minute ventilation; |
| Control    |            | piratory | limits volutrauma (i.e. can    |
| (AC/VC)    | RR         | pressure | guarantee low tidal volume     |
|            |            |          | ventilation)                   |
|            | TV         |          |                                |
|            |            |          | \*\*Primary mode used in MICU  |
|            | I          |          | (mode used in major ARDS       |
|            | nspiratory |          | trials)                        |
|            | flow       |          |                                |
|            |            |          |                                |
|            | FiO2       |          |                                |
+------------+------------+----------+--------------------------------+
| SIMV       | PEEP       |          | Pt gets VC breath for set      |
|            |            |          | rate, but if tries to breath   |
| Sy         | RR         |          | over this will get PS breath;  |
| nchronized |            |          | VC and PS breaths are          |
| In         | TV         |          | synchronized when able         |
| termittent |            |          |                                |
| Mandatory  | PS above   |          |                                |
| V          | PEEP       |          |                                |
| entilation |            |          |                                |
|            | FiO2       |          |                                |
+------------+------------+----------+--------------------------------+
| Pressure   | RR         | TV       | Minimizes barotrauma (i.e.     |
| Control    |            |          | sets a max inspiratory         |
| (AC/PC)    | I          |          | pressure) 🡪 does not guarantee |
|            | nspiratory |          | a specific minute ventilation  |
|            | Pressure   |          | (must monitor PCO2 with blood  |
|            |            |          | gases)                         |
|            | PEEP       |          |                                |
|            |            |          | Does not have natural          |
|            | I          |          | ventilator alarms for          |
|            | nspiratory |          | protection -- need to increase |
|            | Time (or   |          | low minute ventilation alarm   |
|            | I:E ratio) |          | threshold                      |
|            |            |          |                                |
|            | FiO2       |          |                                |
+------------+------------+----------+--------------------------------+
| PRVC       | PEEP       |          | Adaptive pressure control (NOT |
|            |            |          | actually a volume control      |
| Pressure   | RR         |          | mode); tries to limit both     |
| Regulated  |            |          | barotrauma and volutrauma but  |
| Volume     | TV         |          | if in conflict, minute         |
| Control    |            |          | ventilation will drop (i.e.    |
|            | I          |          | need to monitor PCO2 with      |
|            | nspiratory |          | blood gases like any other PC  |
|            | flow       |          | mode)                          |
|            |            |          |                                |
|            | Pressure   |          | Con: More the pt works, the    |
|            | max        |          | less the ventilator does       |
|            |            |          |                                |
|            | FiO2       |          |                                |
+------------+------------+----------+--------------------------------+
| APRV /     | PEEP       | TV       | Long periods of inspiratory    |
| Bilevel    | (PLow)     |          | holds and very brief           |
|            |            |          | expirations (i.e. releases),   |
|            | Pressure   |          | for refractory hypoxemia.      |
|            | High       |          |                                |
|            |            |          | Often difficult to ventilate   |
|            | Time Low   |          | pts on this mode               |
|            |            |          |                                |
|            | Time High  |          |                                |
|            |            |          |                                |
|            | FiO2       |          |                                |
+------------+------------+----------+--------------------------------+

Refractory Hypoxemia -- Amelia Muhs

Background

-   Inadequate arterial oxygenation despite high levels of inspired O2
    or the development of barotrauma in mechanically ventilated pts

-   Generally start to consider the interventions below if needing FiO2
    \>80%

-   Differential:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Worsening underlying primary process (e.g. progressive ARDS)

-   PE

-   Pneumothorax

-   Fluid overload

-   Ventilator-associated Pneumonia

-   New ARDS

    Evaluation:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Always get CXR STAT if pt has new or worsening O2 requirement

-   ABG

-   Can use POCUS to check for lung sliding (pneumothorax) or RV
    enlargement/septal bowing/McConnell's sign (RV strain in PE)

    Initial management

-   Remember -- if at any point the pt is rapidly decompensating, you
    can always disconnect them from the vent and bag them until they
    recover/while calling for help

-   Early consideration of ECMO consult in appropriate pts (discuss with
    MICU fellow)

-   Optimize fluid status 🡪consider diuresis/dialysis if not making
    urine

-   Consider higher PEEP strategy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Increased PEEP 🡪higher mean airway pressure, generally improves
    oxygenation especially with diffuse pulmonary pathologies

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Exceptions may include certain focal/shunt pathologies (e.g. dense
    lobar PNA)

-   Worsening oxygenation may occur with overdistension of alveoli 🡪
    increase dead space ventilation; generally determined empirically at
    the bedside

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Titrate up slowly; generally do not exceed PEEP 18

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Limited by high plateau pressures/barotrauma, overdistension/dead
    space ventilation, decreased preload/venous return

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ARDSnet FiO2/PEEP Tables: At VUMC we typically use the Lower PEEP
    table

![A picture containing text, crossword puzzle Description automatically
generated](media/image13.png){width="2.631837270341207in"
height="1.4303455818022748in"}

-   Other recruitment maneuvers

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Reposition pt -- can try elevating HOB or positioning so "good lung"
    is down

-   If concern for mucus plug, consider need for bronch

-   If concern for significant atelectasis can try recruitment maneuvers
    with the vent including sustained inflation (setting expiratory
    pressure to \~30 for \~30 seconds) and PEEP titration (setting PEEP
    to 20-25 and decreasing by 2cm at a time) -- call the fellow before
    attempting

    Management Algorithm for refractory hypoxemia:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Inhaled vasodilators: Distribute preferentially to well-ventilated
    alveoli -\>local vasodilation -\> improved V/Q matching

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   VUMC formulary preference: inhaled epoprostenol (aka Flolan)

-   Alternatives: inhaled milrinone, inhaled nitric oxide

-   Data suggest improved PaO2/FiO2; large RCT without evidence for
    mortality benefit

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Deep sedation (RASS -4 or -5)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Promotes ventilator synchrony

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Neuromuscular blockade (paralysis) -- call your fellow before doing
    this

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Rationale: maximal vent synchrony (eliminates residual chest
    wall/diaphragm tone)

-   Pt MUST be RASS -5 (need analgesia + sedation)

-   Trial one time IV push of vecuronium 0.1 mg/kg

-   If improved vent synchrony/oxygenation, consider cisatracurium
    (Nimbex) drip

-   Data are mixed 🡪 ACURASYS 2010 (improved 90-day mortality but
    underpowered likely overestimating benefit); ROSE 2019 (no
    difference in 90-day mortality)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Prone positioning (Need attending approval)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pts with moderate to severe ARDS (PaO2/FiO2 ratio \< 150)

-   At VUMC, we use regular ICU beds and manually flip pts; cycle prone
    16h/supine 8h

-   When proning or supining a pt, always have a provider who can
    intubate in the room in case unplanned extubation occurs

-   Considerations: need a team of people to reposition, high risk of ET
    tube malposition, difficult to access lines/perform procedures, high
    risk of pressure injuries

-   Data: PROSEVA 2013 🡪 proning improved 28-day mortality; study c/b
    imbalances between groups

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Alternative ventilator modes (usually PC or APRV/BiLevel/BiVent)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   APRV/BiVent should be avoided in people with bad obstructive lung
    dx, hemodynamic instability, refractory hypercarbia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Venovenous (V-V) ECMO

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indications for hypoxemia:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PaO2/FiO2 \< 50 with FiO2 \>80% for \>3h OR

-   PaO2/FiO2 \< 80 with FiO2 \>80% for \>6h AND

-   Mechanical ventilation ≤ 1 week

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Absolute Contraindications:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Poor short-term prognosis (e.g. metastatic cancer)

-   Irreversible, devastating neurologic pathology

-   Chronic respiratory insufficiency without the possibility for
    transplant

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can calculate RESP score 🡪 predicts in-hospital survival with ECMO

-   CONSULT EARLY if a pt may be a candidate; allows ECMO team to assist
    with evaluation

-   Data:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CESAR 2009: improved 6-month survival without severe disability

-   EOLIA 2018: no mortality benefit but 28% crossover from control to
    ECMO arm dilutes potential effects

Refractory Hypercapnia -- Amelia Muhs

Background

-   Inadequate clearance of CO2 leading to respiratory acidosis (pH ≤
    7.20) despite maximum RR&TV (i.e. minute ventilation) tolerated
    without causing barotrauma or autoPEEP

-   Common causes:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Obstructive lung disease (COPD, emphysema, asthma)

-   Hypoventilation (sleep apnea, obesity, sedative medications (i.e.
    opiates), neuromuscular weakness, chest wall trauma, ascites/pleural
    effusion)

-   Increased CO2 load (shock, sepsis, malignant hyperthermia)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presentation:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Shortness of breath, AMS, somnolence, hypoxemia, tachycardia, HTN
    (in some cases)

Evaluation

-   Physical exam, mental status, recent medications

-   ABG or VBG -- if increased PCO2 and normal pH, always treat the pH
    and not the PCO2 (i.e., may be compensated chronic hypercarbia and
    blowing off more CO2 may be harmful)

Management Algorithm

-   Special considerations

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If history of OSA, make sure they are on home CPAP/BiPAP

-   If opiate related, trial Narcan

-   Bronchodilators for reactive airway diseases

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   BiPAP

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Contraindicated if pt unable to remove BiPAP mask on their own

-   Increase MV by increasing Δ between IPAP/EPAP or increasing RR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mechanical ventilation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Allows you to control rate and TV (in VC modes)

-   To increase MV and CO2 clearance:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Increase RR

    -   30-35 breaths/min is about as high as you can go

    -   Need to keep in mind I/E time to avoid breath stacking/autoPEEP

    -   Some signs of autoPEEP include worsening hypotension and the
        expiratory limb on the flow waveform on the vent not returning
        to zero

-   Increase TV 🡪we usually start at 4-6mL/kg PBW. You can consider
    increasing to 8mL/kg PBW as long as plateau pressures remain \< 30
    cm H2O

    -   Goal peak pressures ≤ 35 cmH2O / plateau pressures ≤ 30 cmH2O

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ARDS -\> permissive hypercapnia (goal pH ≥ 7.2)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   V-V ECMO / Extracorporeal carbon dioxide removal (ECCO2R)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indications for ECMO for hypercapnia:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Severe dynamic hyperinflation and/or severe respiratory acidosis

-   pH ≤ 7.25 with PaCO2 ≥ 60 for 6h with RR at 35/min and TV increased
    to target maximum MV while keeping plateau pressure ≤ 32 cmH2O

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Similar considerations and contraindications as refractory hypoxemia
    (see above)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Benefits: Reduces work of breathing, promotes early ventilator
    weaning/extubating 🡪 allows early mobilization and recovery

Tracheostomy -- Jared Freitas

Indications for Tracheostomy

-   Prolonged mechanical intubation and weaning

-   Tracheal stenosis

-   Acute airway obstructions (head and neck cancers)

-   Trauma

-   Neuromuscular disease

Benefits of Tracheostomy vs ET tube

-   Improved pt comfort and decreased need for sedation

-   Easier access to trachea for suctioning / airway hygiene

-   Reduced laryngeal damage

-   Increased ability to communicate (i.e. speaking valve)

-   May decrease risk of developing ventilator associated pneumonia
    (mixed data)

-   May reduce time to wean from the vent and decrease time in the
    hospital (mixed data)

Timing of Tracheostomy:

-   No mortality difference or ↓ in hospital length of stay for early
    (day 4) vs late (day 10)

-   Generally performed after 2 weeks of intubation, but not backed by
    data

-   Pts that might get tracheostomy earlier: anticipated prolonged
    mechanical ventilation (i.e. those with acute neurologic injury
    affecting spinal cord)

Types of Tracheostomy Tubes:

-   Different brands: most common in hospital = Shiley

-   Components:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Faceplate: keeps tube in place, has the model and size on it

-   Inner cannula: can be removed, cleaned and replaced in case of
    obstruction

-   Cuff (may or may not have): allows for pt to be ventilated; may
    prevent some aspiration

-   Fenestration (may or may not have): allow speaking without valve

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Common sizes:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Initial: 8-0; Standard downsizing: 6-0

-   Lengths: standard vs. larger XLT (P = longer proximal end, D =
    longer distal end)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presenting on ICU rounds = size/cuff status/brand (e.g. 8-0 cuffed
    Shiley)

Speaking Valves:

-   Passy Muir Valve (PMV): one-way valve placed on the outer portion of
    the trach; air moves in with inspiration but is blocked and thus
    funneled up through the vocal cords during exhalation allowing for
    phonation

-   Contraindication: severe upper airway obstruction or aspiration
    risk, copious secretions, decreased cognitive status, severe medical
    instability, or inability to tolerate cuff deflation

-   IMPORTANT SAFETY PRINCIPLE: cuff must be deflated, since air needs
    to be able to travel back up the airway, if the cuff is not deflated
    and you put the PMV on, then pt cannot exhale

Maintenance of Tracheostomy Tubes:

-   Inner cannula should be cleaned 2-3 times per day

-   Daily stoma care should be initiated to prevent pressure ulcers and
    stoma infections

-   As needed suctioning for secretions

Complications and airway emergencies in a tracheostomy pt:

-   Hemorrhage (mild bleeding from surface vessels and granulation
    tissue is common, major bleeding is rare 🡪 think erosion into
    brachiocephalic \[innominate\] artery)

-   Airway damage 🡪subglottic or tracheal stenosis; tracheobronchitis

-   Fistulas (tracheoarterial, tracheoesophageal)

-   Unintended tracheostomy tube dislodgement:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bag mask (use hand/gauze to occlude stoma) or intubate from above
    (i.e. through the mouth); if complete laryngectomy then must use
    stoma

-   Fresh trach (≤ 14 days): do NOT replace due to risk of misplacement
    into the mediastinum and loss of airway; airway management from
    above

-   Older trach: can be replaced at bedside with obturator by trained
    staff

-   All pts with trachs have a yellow sign above bed with date, type,
    size of trach as well as a replacement trach with obturator in the
    room

Secretion Management

-   Respiratory hygiene ("pulmonary toilet"): heated vent, guaifenesin,
    hypertonic saline, DuoNebs, cough assist device, appropriate
    suctioning (too much = worsen secretions), acapella, IS

ABCDEF (A2F) Bundle -- Kaele Leonard

Background

-   Post-Intensive Care Syndrome (PICS): complex constellation of
    cognitive, physical, and psychological impairments that impact most
    survivors of critical illness, leading to disability, frailty, and
    poor quality of life

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Predicted by (1) duration of immobility and (2) delirium

-   Both are reduced by \>80% compliance with ABCDEF (A2F) Bundle
    concepts

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ABCDEF (A2F) Bundle: Interprofessional, evidence-based safety bundle
    of care principles to help reduce LOS, mortality, bounce-backs, and
    the duration of ICU delirium and coma

-   Goal: allow pt to "prove us wrong" about readiness for liberation
    from devices, sedatives, etc.

[**\
A**ssess, prevent, and manage pain]{.mark}

-   Tools to assess pain using facial expressions, body movements,
    muscle tension, compliance with ventilator, or vocalization for
    extubated pts

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ex: Critical Care Pain Observation Tool (CPOT): scale 0-8,
    uncontrolled pain \>=3

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Uncontrolled pain increases risk for delirium, limits inspiratory
    effort & weaning from ventilator, and limits ability to mobilize

-   Treatment: multi-modal: parenteral opioids, neuropathic meds (e.g.,
    gabapentin, ketamine), adjunctive non-opioids analgesics (e.g.,
    acetaminophen, NSAIDs), nonpharmacologic interventions
    (repositioning, heat/cold)

[**\
B**oth spontaneous awakening trials (SATs) and spontaneous breathing
trials (SBTs)]{.mark}

-   SATs = daily sedative interruptions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   RN-driven protocol involving safety checklist: no active seizures,
    alcohol withdrawal, agitation, paralytics, myocardial infarction, or
    increased ICP

-   If pass SAT, proceed to SBT

-   If fail SAT (anxiety, agitation, pain, resp distress) 🡪restart
    sedation at ½ doses

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   SBTs = PS ventilation (Fi02 ≤ 50%, PEEP ≤ 7.5; typically 40% and
    5/5) for ≥ 30 minutes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   RT or physician/APP-driven protocol with safety screen: passed SAT,
    O2 sat ≥ 88%, inspiratory efforts, no myocardial ischemia, no/low
    vasopressor support

-   If pass SBT, physician/APP judgment on extubation

-   If fail SBT (RR \> 35 or \< 8, O2 sat \< 88%, resp distress, mental
    status change) 🡪 restart full ventilatory support

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Evidence:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Liberated pts from mechanical ventilation 3 days sooner, decreased
    ICU and hospital length of stay by 4 days, and 14% absolute
    reduction in mortality at 1 year

[**\
C**hoice of analgesia and sedation]{.mark}

-   Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale (RASS): sedation & level of
    arousal assessment tool (Figure 1)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Target light sedation of RASS -1 to 0 with goal of (1) pt following
    commands without agitation and (2) limiting immobilization

-   Over-sedation: hold sedatives till target, then restart at ½ prior
    dose

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Analgosedation with focus on treating pain first and then adding
    sedation meds PRN

-   Sedatives: dexmedetomidine (dex) or propofol \>\>\> benzodiazepines
    (increased delirium risk)

![Text Description automatically generated with medium
confidence](media/image14.png){width="3.2095363079615047in"
height="1.8149650043744532in"}

Figure 1: Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale (RASS) [Delirium - assess,
prevent, and manage]{.mark}

**\
**

**D**elirium- assess, prevent, and manage

-   Screening for delirium: q4h using CAM-ICU (Figure 2)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Affects 60-80% of ventilated pts and associated with increased
    morbidity and mortality, longer ICU and hospital length of stay,
    long-term cognitive dysfunction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Risk factors and treatment: see Delirium section in Psychiatry

[**\
E**arly mobility and exercise]{.mark}

-   Prolonged immobilization during critical illness leads to
    ICU-acquired weakness, associated with worse outcomes: ↑ mechanical
    ventilation, increased hosp length of stay, greater mortality, and
    greater disability

-   Consult PT/OT to initiate rehab at the beginning of critical illness

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can be done safely in pts receiving advanced support

[**\
F**amily engagement and empowerment]{.mark}

-   Especially important when pts are unable to communicate themselves

-   Incorporate family at the bedside and on rounds to learn pt
    preferences and values, engage in shared-decision making, and
    address questions and concerns

![Diagram Description automatically
generated](media/image15.png){width="3.3101881014873142in"
height="2.556961942257218in"}

Figure 2: Confusion Assessment Method for the Intensive Care Unit
(CAM-ICU)

ICU Delirium - Phil Schmitt

Background

-   **Delirium** is a DSM-V diagnosis based on acute-onset fluctuating
    attention and awareness, unlike the chronic changes seen in
    dementia. It is largely interchangeable with **Encephalopathy**.

-   This becomes more difficult to assess when patients are sedated,
    intubated, etc. in the ICU

-   Very well-studied at VUMC, more resources found at:
    ttps://www.icudelirium.org.

-   Associated with higher morbidity and mortality compared to those who
    do not experience delirium and duration of delirium also associated
    with higher morbidity and mortality.

Evaluation

-   Can present as either **hyperactive** (agitated, trying to leave
    bed, etc.) or **hypoactive** (somnolent, minimally interactive,
    etc.).

-   Do neuro exam to rule out focal deficits. Basic ICU/coma neuro exam
    detailed below:

+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Level of        | If not alert and oriented, test if they are        |
| consciousness   | **redirectable/open eyes to loud voice**           |
+=================+====================================================+
| CN II           | **Pupillary light reflex -** check pupillary       |
|                 | size + rate of constriction, symmetry              |
| (also III)      |                                                    |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| CN III/IV/VI    | **Eye tracking** to voice, roaming around room     |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| CN V/VII        | **Corneal blink reflex** - can use NS syringes to  |
|                 | drop water into eyes                               |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| CN VIII         | **Oculocephalic reflex** - turn head left/right,   |
|                 | eyes should compensate to fix in forward position  |
| (also III + VI) |                                                    |
|                 | ![A drawing of a person\'s face Description        |
|                 | automatically                                      |
|                 | generate                                           |
|                 | d](media/image16.png){width="2.0015430883639547in" |
|                 | height="0.6149321959755031in"}                     |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| CN IX/X         | **Cough/Gag** - Can test with tongue depressor. If |
|                 | intubated, can advance/retract OG tube for gag and |
|                 | endotracheal tube suction catheter for cough       |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| CN XI           | Difficult in delirious/intubated patients, can     |
|                 | check for **Shoulder shrugging** with pain         |
|                 | response                                           |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| CN XII          | Difficult in delirious/intubated patients, can     |
|                 | monitor for **Spontaneous tongue movements**       |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Extremities     | **+Withdrawal to pain**: Pt appears to             |
|                 | voluntarily, non-stereotypically withdraw limbs to |
|                 | vigorous nailbed pressure, sternal rub, trapezius  |
|                 | pinch                                              |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | **+Localization of pain:** Pt will attempt to      |
|                 | reach to side of painful stimulus                  |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | **+Muscle Tone**: relaxed at baseline, no abnormal |
|                 | flexion/extension IE posturing                     |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | **+Presence of abnormal reflexes**: Unilateral     |
|                 | hyper-/hypoactive reflexes, rapid & transient      |
|                 | stereotyped movements to noxious stimuli IE triple |
|                 | flexion, up-going babinsky, ankle clonus           |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+

-   For ICU Patients, consider sedation when doing neuro exam - propofol
    and other anesthesia dampens brainstem + peripheral reflexes

-   Always remember patients can be encephalopathic and evolve another
    acute neurological syndrome. Follow up any odd/changing exam
    findings.

-   Perform the CAM-ICU for scoring -- ICU nurses perform this q4h as
    part of routine ICU care

![A diagram of a problem Description automatically generated with medium
confidence](media/image17.png){width="1.625770997375328in"
height="1.981408573928259in"}

-   See RASS scoring table in ABCDEF Bundle Critical Care chapter.

Differential Diagnosis for ICU Delirium

-   **Most typically due to changes in environment, alterations in sleep
    cycle**, reduced cognitive reserve from critical illness, dementia,
    neurodegeneration, etc**.**

-   other differentials fit in a modified **VITAMINS PO** mnemonic

+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| **         | Ischemic stroke, CNS hemorrhage, arrhythmia, carotid    |
| V**ascular | stenosis                                                |
+============+=========================================================+
| **I*       | +Any severe illness, UTI & PNA are most common          |
| *nfectious |                                                         |
|            | +Also consider meningitis/encephalitis                  |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| **T**rauma | Falls, TBI, etc.                                        |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| **A*       | Autoimmune encephalitis, SLE, CNS vasculitis among      |
| *utoimmune | others                                                  |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| **M        | +Constipation                                           |
| **etabolic |                                                         |
|            | +Hypo/hyperthyroidism, hypoglycemia, AKI,               |
|            | hypercalcemia, hyperammonemia (IE hepatic               |
|            | encephalopathy), severe hyponatremia, Uremia among many |
|            | others                                                  |
|            |                                                         |
|            | +Vitamin deficiencies - thiamine and B12 especially     |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| **I        | +Illicits, Opiates, Benzos, barbiturates,               |
| **ngestion | anti-psychotics, anti-cholinergics, cefepime            |
|            |                                                         |
|            | +Withdrawal syndromes - EtOH/benzos/opioids especially, |
|            | also SSRI's/daily psych meds                            |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| **         | Brain mets, primary CNS tumors, CA associated with      |
| N**eoplasm | paraneoplastic syndromes (SCLC, Multiple myeloma,       |
|            | ovarian teratoma, etc.)                                 |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| *          |                                                         |
| *S**eizure |                                                         |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| **P**ain   | Always important to consider, especially in geriatric   |
|            | pts                                                     |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+
| **O**      | Hypoxia                                                 |
| xygenation |                                                         |
+------------+---------------------------------------------------------+

Management

-   Initial toxic/metabolic/infectious workup can include: CBC, CMP,
    TSH, Folate, Vitamin B12, UA, blood cultures, CT Head w/o. Look
    through med list to see if there are any sedating medications that
    could be contributing and try to minimize as much as possible.

-   Definitive treatment is addressing underlying etiology.

-   First-line symptomatic treatment includes delirium precautions, such
    as keeping blinds open during daytime, limiting daytime naps,
    redirection when agitated, lights on during day, TV on during day,
    family at bedside (opposite of these at night). There is an order in
    Epic called Nursing: Delirium Care, which can be found as part of
    the Geriatric Delirium Care order set, that has all these
    precautions listed out.

-   Although they do not provide mortality benefit in ICU delirium
    patients (and debatably worsen mortality), antipsychotics can be
    used if needed for more severe agitation IE pulling at lines,
    physical aggression. Start with one-time dose of zyprexa 2.5 mg or 5
    mg, can escalate to 1 mg haldol if refractory. Check an EKG for QTc
    prolongation (\>440ms) prior to giving.

Brain Death - Anna Berry

Background

-   Brain death= complete and permanent loss of brain function. Defined
    by coma with loss of capacity for consciousness, brainstem reflexes,
    and the ability to breathe independently

Checklist for Determination of Brain Death (American Academy of
Neurology)

1\. Prerequisites (all must be checked)

-   Coma, irreversible and cause known

-   Neuroimaging explains coma -- usually CT or MRI

-   Absence of CNS depressing drugs

-   No evidence of residual paralytics (electrical stimulation if
    paralytics used)

-   Absence of severe acid-base, electrolyte, endocrine abnormality

-   Normothermia or mild hypothermia (core temp \>36°C)

-   SBP ≥100 mmHg

-   No spontaneous respirations

2\. Examination (all must be checked) -- Attending MUST be present for
brain death exam

![Table Description automatically generated with low
confidence](media/image18.png){width="3.434015748031496in"
height="2.5454265091863517in"}

Greer DM, Determination of Brain Death. *NEJM.* 2021;385;2554-61. doi:
0.1056/NEJMcp2025326

3\. Apnea testing (all must be checked) -- Attending MUST be present

-   Pt is hemodynamically stable

-   Ventilator adjusted to provide normocarbia (PaCO2 35--45 mmHg)

-   Preoxygenate with 100% FiO2 and PEEP of 5 cmH2O for \>10 min to PaO2
    \>200 mmHg

-   Provide oxygen via a suction catheter to the level of the carina at
    6 L/min or attach T-piece with continuous positive airway pressure
    (CPAP) at 10 cmH2O

-   Disconnect ventilator

-   Spontaneous respirations absent

-   Arterial blood gas drawn at 8--10 minutes, pt reconnected to
    ventilator

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PCO2 ≥60 mmHg, or 20 mmHg rise from normal baseline value; OR:

-   Apnea test aborted due to spontaneous respirations present,
    hemodynamic instability, or hypoxia

4\. Ancillary testing (Order one test if clinical examination cannot be
fully performed due to pt factors or if apnea testing
inconclusive/aborted)

-   Cerebral angiogram

-   HMPAO SPECT (Single photon emission computed tomography)

-   EEG & TCD (transcranial Doppler)

Organ donation caveats

-   Discussions about organ donation should take place between Tennessee
    Donor Services (TDS) and the surrogate. You SHOULD NOT be having
    conversations with the surrogate about donation. Direct questions to
    TDS

MICU/CCU Drips -- Patrick Barney

Most have order sets in Epic. Typically choose Titration Allowed" in ICU

+--------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+-------------+
| Vasopressors |           |          |                 |             |
+==============+===========+==========+=================+=============+
| **Drug**     | Dose      | R        | Indications     | Con         |
|              |           | eceptors |                 | siderations |
+--------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+-------------+
| No           | 1 -- 100  | αα1 \>   | 1^st^ line      | Peripheral  |
| repinephrine | mcg/min   | β1       | septic shock    | ischemia,   |
| (Levophed)   |           |          |                 | skin        |
|              |           |          |                 | necrosis    |
+--------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+-------------+
| P            | Bolus:    | αα1      | Periprocedural  | Reflex      |
| henylephrine | 0.05 --   |          | hypotension     | b           |
| (Ne          | 0.5 mg q  |          | (Neostick), pts | radycardia, |
| osynephrine) | 10-15 min |          | w/              | Peripheral  |
|              |           |          | ta              | ischemia,   |
|              | Infusion: |          | chyarrhythmias, | skin        |
|              | 40-360    |          | Critical AS or  | necrosis    |
|              | mcg/min   |          | HOCM with       |             |
|              |           |          | severe LVOT     |             |
|              |           |          | obstruction and |             |
|              |           |          | shock           |             |
+--------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+-------------+
| Epinephrine  | 1 -- 40   | α        | Post PEA        | Tachy-a     |
|              | mcg/min   | α1=β1=β2 | arrest,         | rrhythmias, |
|              |           |          | Anaphylaxis,    | Peripheral  |
|              |           |          | Septic shock    | ischemia,   |
|              |           |          | (severe),       | skin        |
|              |           |          | Cardiogenic     | necrosis    |
|              |           |          | shock           |             |
+--------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+-------------+
| Vasopressin  | 0.04      | V1, V2,  | 2^nd^ line      | Hy          |
|              | U/min (no | V3       | septic shock,   | ponatremia, |
|              | ti        |          | Right heart     | Bradycardia |
|              | tration); |          | failure         |             |
+--------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+-------------+
| ANG II       | 20 -- 40  | ANG II   | Refractory      | Thrombosis  |
|              | ng/kg/min |          | vasodilatory    | 🡪 pt MUST   |
| \*needs      |           |          | shock           | have        |
| approval     |           |          |                 | chemical    |
| MICU         |           |          |                 | DVT ppx.    |
| leadership   |           |          |                 | Cont        |
|              |           |          |                 | raindicated |
|              |           |          |                 | in heart    |
|              |           |          |                 | failure     |
+--------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+-------------+
| Dopamine     | 2 -- 20   | Dopamine | Hypotension,    | Tachy-a     |
|              | m         | (1-5     | Cardiogenic     | rrhythmias, |
|              | cg/kg/min | mcg) \>  | shock           | Peripheral  |
|              |           | β1 (5-10 |                 | ischemia,   |
|              |           | mcg)     |                 | skin        |
|              |           | \>α1     |                 | necrosis    |
|              |           | (        |                 |             |
|              |           | \>10mcg) |                 |             |
+--------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+-------------+
| Dobutamine   | 2.5 -- 20 | β1       | Cardiogenic     | V           |
|              | m         | \>\>\>   | shock           | asodilation |
|              | cg/kg/min | β2       |                 | H           |
|              |           |          |                 | ypotension, |
|              |           |          |                 | T           |
|              |           |          |                 | achycardia, |
|              |           |          |                 | Ta          |
|              |           |          |                 | chyphylaxis |
+--------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+-------------+
| Milrinone    | 0.375 --  | PDE-3    | Cardiogenic     | H           |
|              | 0.75      |          | shock           | ypotension, |
|              | m         |          |                 | Renally     |
|              | cg/kg/min |          |                 | cleared     |
+--------------+-----------+----------+-----------------+-------------+

+--------------+---+--------+---+-----------+---+---------+------------------+
| Sedatives/   |   |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
| Anxiolytics: |   |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
+==============+===+========+===+===========+===+=========+==================+
| **Drug**     |   | Dose   |   | Class     |   | Met     | Side Effects     |
|              |   |        |   |           |   | abolism |                  |
+--------------+---+--------+---+-----------+---+---------+------------------+
| Propofol     | I |        | G |           | H |         | Severe           |
|              | n |        | e |           | e |         | hypotension,     |
|              | f |        | n |           | p |         | bradycardia,     |
|              | u |        | e |           | a |         | hyper            |
|              | s |        | r |           | t |         | triglyceridemia, |
|              | i |        | a |           | i |         | propofol         |
|              | o |        | l |           | c |         | infusion         |
|              | n |        | a |           | , |         | syndrome (rare)  |
|              | : |        | n |           | R |         |                  |
|              | 5 |        | a |           | e |         | Monitor for      |
|              | - |        | e |           | n |         | toxicity with q4 |
|              | - |        | s |           | a |         | day TGs and CK   |
|              | 1 |        | t |           | l |         |                  |
|              | 5 |        | h |           | ( |         |                  |
|              | 0 |        | e |           | m |         |                  |
|              | m |        | t |           | i |         |                  |
|              | c |        | i |           | n |         |                  |
|              | g |        | c |           | o |         |                  |
|              | / |        | ( |           | r |         |                  |
|              | k |        | G |           | ) |         |                  |
|              | g |        | A |           |   |         |                  |
|              | / |        | B |           |   |         |                  |
|              | m |        | A |           |   |         |                  |
|              | i |        | R |           |   |         |                  |
|              | n |        | a |           |   |         |                  |
|              |   |        | g |           |   |         |                  |
|              |   |        | o |           |   |         |                  |
|              |   |        | n |           |   |         |                  |
|              |   |        | i |           |   |         |                  |
|              |   |        | s |           |   |         |                  |
|              |   |        | t |           |   |         |                  |
|              |   |        | ) |           |   |         |                  |
+--------------+---+--------+---+-----------+---+---------+------------------+
| Dex          | I |        | C |           | H |         | Hypotension,     |
| medetomidine | n |        | e |           | e |         | bradycardia      |
| (Precedex)   | f |        | n |           | p |         |                  |
|              | u |        | t |           | a |         |                  |
|              | s |        | r |           | t |         |                  |
|              | i |        | a |           | i |         |                  |
|              | o |        | l |           | c |         |                  |
|              | n |        | α |           |   |         |                  |
|              | : |        | α |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 0 |        | 2 |           |   |         |                  |
|              | . |        | a |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 1 |        | g |           |   |         |                  |
|              | - |        | o |           |   |         |                  |
|              | - |        | n |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 1 |        | i |           |   |         |                  |
|              | . |        | s |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 5 |        | t |           |   |         |                  |
|              | m |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | c |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | g |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | / |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | k |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | g |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | / |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | h |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
+--------------+---+--------+---+-----------+---+---------+------------------+
| Midazolam    | P |        | B |           | H |         | Hypotension,     |
| (Versed)     | u |        | e |           | e |         | risk of BNZ      |
|              | s |        | n |           | p |         | withdrawal if    |
|              | h |        | z |           | a |         | used for long    |
|              | : |        | o |           | t |         | periods with     |
|              | 0 |        | d |           | i |         | sudden           |
|              | . |        | i |           | c |         | discontinuation  |
|              | 5 |        | a |           | & |         |                  |
|              | - |        | z |           | R |         |                  |
|              | - |        | e |           | e |         |                  |
|              | 5 |        | p |           | n |         |                  |
|              | m |        | i |           | a |         |                  |
|              | g |        | n |           | l |         |                  |
|              |   |        | e |           |   |         |                  |
|              | I |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | n |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | f |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | u |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | s |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | i |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | o |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | n |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | : |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 0 |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | . |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 2 |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 5 |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | - |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | - |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 5 |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | m |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | g |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | / |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | h |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | ( |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | n |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | o |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | m |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | a |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | x |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | d |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | o |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | s |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | e |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | ) |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
+--------------+---+--------+---+-----------+---+---------+------------------+
| Lorazepam    | P |        | B |           | H |         | Hypotension.     |
| (Ativan)     | u |        | e |           | e |         | Propylene glycol |
|              | s |        | n |           | p |         | carrier -- AGMA  |
|              | h |        | z |           | a |         |                  |
|              | : |        | o |           | t |         |                  |
|              | 0 |        | d |           | i |         |                  |
|              | . |        | i |           | c |         |                  |
|              | 5 |        | a |           |   |         |                  |
|              | - |        | z |           |   |         |                  |
|              | - |        | e |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 1 |        | p |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 0 |        | i |           |   |         |                  |
|              | m |        | n |           |   |         |                  |
|              | g |        | e |           |   |         |                  |
|              |   |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | I |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | n |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | f |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | u |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | s |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | i |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | o |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | n |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | : |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 0 |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | . |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 5 |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | - |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | - |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 5 |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | m |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | g |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | / |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | h |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | ( |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | n |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | o |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | m |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | a |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | x |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | d |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | o |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | s |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | e |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | ) |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
+--------------+---+--------+---+-----------+---+---------+------------------+
| Ketamine     | P |        | N |           | H |         | Deliri           |
|              | u |        | D |           | e |         | um/hallucination |
|              | s |        | M |           | p |         | -- use caution   |
|              | h |        | A |           | a |         | in pts with      |
|              | : |        | a |           | t |         | psychiatric hx,  |
|              | 1 |        | n |           | i |         | hypertension,    |
|              | - |        | t |           | c |         | tachycardia      |
|              | 2 |        | a |           |   |         |                  |
|              | m |        | g |           |   |         | Pretreat with    |
|              | g |        | o |           |   |         | 0.4mg IV         |
|              | / |        | n |           |   |         | glycopyrrolate   |
|              | k |        | i |           |   |         | to avoid         |
|              | g |        | s |           |   |         | hyper-salivation |
|              |   |        | t |           |   |         |                  |
|              | I |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | n |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | f |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | u |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | s |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | i |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | o |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | n |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | : |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 0 |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | . |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 2 |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | m |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | g |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | / |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | k |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | g |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | / |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | h |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | , |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | t |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | i |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | t |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | r |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | a |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | t |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | e |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | b |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | y |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 0 |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | . |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 1 |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | q |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 1 |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | 5 |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | m |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | i |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
|              | n |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
+--------------+---+--------+---+-----------+---+---------+------------------+
|              |   |        |   |           |   |         |                  |
+--------------+---+--------+---+-----------+---+---------+------------------+

+-------------+-------------------+-----------+-----------------------+
| Analgesic:  |                   |           |                       |
+=============+===================+===========+=======================+
| **Drug**    | Dose              | M         | Side effects          |
|             |                   | etabolism |                       |
+-------------+-------------------+-----------+-----------------------+
| Fentanyl    | Push: 25 -- 100   | Hepatic   | Hypotension,          |
|             | mcg               |           | Serotonin syndrome,   |
|             |                   |           | chest wall rigidity   |
|             | Infusion: 25 --   |           | at high doses         |
|             | 400 mcg/h         |           |                       |
+-------------+-------------------+-----------+-----------------------+
| Morphine    | Push: 1 -- 5 mg   | Hepa      | Hypotension           |
|             | q1-2h prn         | tic/Renal | (profound), itching,  |
|             |                   |           | constipation, HA;     |
|             | Infusion: 1 -- 5  |           | avoid in renal        |
|             | mg/h              |           | failure               |
+-------------+-------------------+-----------+-----------------------+
| Hy          | Push: 0.25--1mg   | Hepatic   | Hypotension,          |
| dromorphone | q1-2h prn         |           | respiratory           |
| (Dilaudid)  |                   |           | depression, itching   |
|             | Infusion: 0.5--3  |           |                       |
|             | mg/h              |           |                       |
+-------------+-------------------+-----------+-----------------------+

+----------+------------------+---------+-----------+----------------+
| Anti-AR  |                  |         |           |                |
| r        |                  |         |           |                |
| hythmics |                  |         |           |                |
+==========+==================+=========+===========+================+
| Drug     | Dose             | Indi    | Side      | Comments       |
|          |                  | cations | effects   |                |
+----------+------------------+---------+-----------+----------------+
| A        | 6 -- 12 mg IV    | PSVT    | Complete  | 10 second      |
| denosine | rapid push and   | con     | AV nodal  | half-life      |
|          | flush; may       | version | blockade  |                |
|          | repeat x2        |         |           | Must have      |
|          |                  |         |           | continuous     |
|          |                  |         |           | EKG/tele       |
|          |                  |         |           | monitor        |
+----------+------------------+---------+-----------+----------------+
| Am       | ACLS: 300 mg IV  | Vtac    | Pulm,     | Less           |
| iodarone | push             | h/Vfib, | o         | hypotension    |
|          |                  | Afib    | phthalmic | than other     |
|          | Non-emergent:    |         | and       | agents, safe   |
|          | 150 mg over 10   |         | thyroid   | in heart       |
|          | min then 0.5     |         | toxicity  | failure. May   |
|          | mg/min           |         | w/        | chemically     |
|          |                  |         | chronic   | cardiovert     |
|          |                  |         | use       | pts, caution   |
|          |                  |         |           | if off         |
|          |                  |         |           | therapeutic AC |
+----------+------------------+---------+-----------+----------------+
| D        | Push: 10 -- 20   | Afib,   | Bra       | Avoid use in   |
| iltiazem | mg q15 min x 2   | Af      | dycardia, | pts with HfrEF |
|          | if no response   | lutter, | hy        |                |
|          |                  | PSVT    | potension |                |
|          | Infusion: 5 --   |         |           |                |
|          | 15 mg/h          |         |           |                |
+----------+------------------+---------+-----------+----------------+
| L        | ACLS: 1 mg/kg x  | Vtach   | Bra       | Avoid use in   |
| idocaine | 1                |         | dycardia, | liver failure/ |
|          |                  |         | Heart     | Okay for       |
|          | Infusion: 1 -- 4 |         | block     | HfrEF. Often   |
|          | mg/min           |         |           | 1^st^ line CCU |
|          |                  |         |           | med for VT/    |
|          |                  |         |           | May need to    |
|          |                  |         |           | check levels   |
|          |                  |         |           | if using for   |
|          |                  |         |           | longer than 24 |
|          |                  |         |           | hours          |
+----------+------------------+---------+-----------+----------------+
| Proc     | 15 mg/kg over 30 | Vtach,  | Bra       | Drug-induced   |
| ainamide | min then 1 -- 6  | ref     | dycardia, | lupus,         |
|          | mg/min           | ractory | hy        | cytopenias     |
|          |                  | afib    | potension |                |
+----------+------------------+---------+-----------+----------------+

+-----------+---+------+-------------+--------+----------+------------+
|           |   | An   |             |        |          |            |
|           |   | ti-h |             |        |          |            |
|           |   | yper |             |        |          |            |
|           |   | tens |             |        |          |            |
|           |   | ives |             |        |          |            |
+===========+===+======+=============+========+==========+============+
| Drug      | C |      | Dose        | Indic  | Side     | Comments   |
|           | l |      |             | ations | effects  |            |
|           | a |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | s |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | s |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | / |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | M |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | O |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | A |      |             |        |          |            |
+-----------+---+------+-------------+--------+----------+------------+
| Esmolol   | B |      | Bolus:      | Aortic | Brad     | Titrate to |
|           | e |      | 1mg/kg over | disse  | ycardia, | desired BP |
|           | t |      | 30s         | ction, | hyp      | or HR.     |
|           | a |      |             | HTN    | otension | Caution in |
|           | b |      | Infusion:   | eme    |          | HfrEF      |
|           | l |      | 50-30       | rgency |          |            |
|           | o |      | 0mcg/kg/min |        |          |            |
|           | c |      | (max 300)   |        |          |            |
|           | k |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | e |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | r |      |             |        |          |            |
+-----------+---+------+-------------+--------+----------+------------+
| Ni        | C |      | Infusion:   | HTN    | Brad     | Titrate to |
| cardipine | C |      | 5-15mg/h    | eme    | ycardia, | desired    |
|           | B |      | (max 15)    | rgency | hyp      | BP, avoid  |
|           |   |      |             |        | otension | in HfrEF   |
+-----------+---+------+-------------+--------+----------+------------+
| Nitr      | M |      | Infusion:   | HTN E, | Hypo     | Contr      |
| oprusside | e |      | 0.3         | flash  | tension, | aindicated |
|           | t |      | mcg/kg/min; | pul    | cyanide  | in hepatic |
|           | a |      | titrate     | monary | toxicity | and renal  |
|           | b |      | q2min to    | edema, |          | failure    |
|           | o |      | max         | HfrEF  |          |            |
|           | l |      | 1           | for    |          |            |
|           | i |      | 0mcg/kg/min | aft    |          |            |
|           | z |      |             | erload |          |            |
|           | e |      |             | red    |          |            |
|           | d |      |             | uction |          |            |
|           | t |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | o |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | N |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | O |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | 🡪 |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | v |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | a |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | s |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | o |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | d |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | i |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | l |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | a |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | t |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | o |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | r |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | y |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | e |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | f |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | f |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | e |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | c |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | t |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | ( |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | a |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | r |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | t |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | e |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | r |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | i |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | a |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | l |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | r |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | o |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | u |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | g |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | h |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | l |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | y |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | = |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | v |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | e |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | n |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | o |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | u |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | s |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | ) |      |             |        |          |            |
+-----------+---+------+-------------+--------+----------+------------+
| Nitr      | N |      | Infusion:   | Refr   | Hypo     | Contr      |
| oglycerin | O |      | start       | actory | tension, | aindicated |
|           | m |      | 0.25        | a      | h        | in severe  |
|           | e |      | mcg/kg/min, | ngina, | eadache, | RHF and    |
|           | d |      | titrate by  | flash  | palp     | concurrent |
|           | i |      | 1mcg/kg/min | pul    | itations | use of     |
|           | a |      | q15min (max | monary |          | PDE-5      |
|           | t |      | 10          | edema, |          | inhibitor  |
|           | e |      | mcg/kg/min) | HTN    |          |            |
|           | d |      |             | eme    |          |            |
|           | v |      |             | rgency |          |            |
|           | e |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | n |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | o |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | u |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | s |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | \ |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | > |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | a |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | r |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | t |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | e |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | r |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | i |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | a |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | l |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | v |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | a |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | s |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | o |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | d |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | i |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | l |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | a |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | t |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | i |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | o |      |             |        |          |            |
|           | n |      |             |        |          |            |
+-----------+---+------+-------------+--------+----------+------------+
|           |   |      |             |        |          |            |
+-----------+---+------+-------------+--------+----------+------------+
|           |   |      |             |        |          |            |
+-----------+---+------+-------------+--------+----------+------------+

Running Codes -- Jacqueline Visina

Arrival to a Code

-   Questions to ask when you arrive: Is someone running the code? What
    is the pt's code status? Who is doing compressions? Pads on the pt?
    IV access?

-   Take charge: establish if anyone is actively running the code. If
    someone is running the code, introduce yourself and ask how you may
    be helpful. If someone is NOT, have someone begin chest compressions
    IMMEDIATELY and assume responsibility for the running the code

-   IV access: IV access preferred, if no immediate IV access, place IO

-   Obtain a brief medical history and events surrounding the code and
    the pt's code status

-   Have someone find the nearest crash cart and get pads on the pt as
    soon as possible

Running the Code

-   Assess the rhythm

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If Vfib/VT, immediately shock

-   For polymorphic VT, this is ischemia until proven otherwise unless
    the pt is on a large amount of QTc prolonging medications.

-   If PEA/Asystole- resume compressions, give Epi 1mg ASAP

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Strong ACLS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Q2min- pulse check, rhythm check, shock?

-   Remember the two interventions with proven mortality benefit are
    high quality chest compressions and early defibrillation. Do not
    interrupt these actions for other things

-   Monitor the quality of chest compressions

-   Warn resuscitators when shock is being delivered

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider Advanced Airway

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Remember chest compressions save lives. Not intubation. Do not stop
    compressions for intubation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stay Calm

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Closed Loop communication- continue giving instructions, use names,
    minimize interruptions

-   Do not move from foot of bed if you are running the code

-   Ensure delivery of adequate compressions. Avoid excessive
    ventilation

-   If you are running the code, it is helpful to maintain a constant
    verbal running summary of interventions that have been tried and the
    course of the code

-   Have a member of the team locate an ultrasound for line placement
    and diagnostics

-   \*\*Allow family to be present - If family present, ensure that some
    healthcare provider (nurse, APP, resident, attending) is with the
    family (to answer questions, explain what is going on)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   H's and T's: Treat Reversible Factors

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Some of the fellows here will empirically give 2 grams of magnesium,
    1 amp of D50, 1 amp of bicarb, and 1g calcium chloride at the onset
    of the code irrespective of presenting rhythm

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can send Labs -- ask for a "loaded gas." This will usually be a
    VBG/ABG with lactate, K, Ca, and Hgb. Often information does not
    result quick enough to change immediate management. Have someone
    look up most recent labs in Epic (looking for recent hyperK,
    acidosis)

Terminating a Code

-   Consider initial rhythm, pt comorbidities, cardiac vs non-cardiac
    arrest, bedside echo findings. ROSC or rhythm changes during code?

-   Persistent ETCO2 \< 10 mmHg after 20min CPR has minimal survival

-   Ask your team if they have any other therapies that they feel would
    be indicated

-   Ask if anyone remains in favor of continuing CPR

-   When unanimous, terminate the code and announce time of death. Thank
    your team. Take a moment of silence for the deceased pt

Post-Arrest Care

-   Immediately following ROSC is the most dangerous point of ACLS

-   Airway: Secure airway if not done during code, ensure RT avoids
    hypoxia or hyperoxia

-   BP: MAPs\>65, IVF and/or pressors if needed

-   If on floor, prioritize moving pt to a unit for ongoing care once
    hemodynamically stable enough for transfer. Would not delay for
    other diagnostics/interventions (lines, CXR, etc)

-   Cardiac: obtain EKG. Assess if urgent cardiac intervention is
    required for STEMI vs unstable cardiogenic shock vs VT storm or Vfib

-   Neuro: if not following commands, consider TTM. TTM is still
    performed at VUMC with a strict protocol and inclusion criteria. If
    there is any question about TTM eligibility, page the CCU fellow

-   Send rainbow labs (CBC, CMP, Mg, coags, trop, lactate, VBG/ABG).
    Treat rapidly reversible causes

-   CXR

-   Propofol/fentanyl infusion if the pt is intubated. Pressor of choice
    post ROSC is usually levophed

-   If not done during the code, usually central access will be obtained
    and an arterial line will be placed

\*Intern role during codes: maintain hand on femoral pulse, place IO if
needed, or have access to the pt's chart to answer questions that arise
during the code. If family is not available, looking up primary contact
information is invaluable. In the MICU, your role is to grab the yellow
IO kit prior to leaving for the code

\*\*Family presence during CPR: studies show that it reduces the
frequency of PTSD-related symptoms and does not interfere with medical
efforts

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Treatable Causes of Cardiac Arrest: 
  The H's and T's                     
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  H's                                 T's

  Hypoxia                             Toxins

  Hypovolemia                         Tamponade

  H+                                  Tension Pneumothorax

  Hypo/Hyper K                        Thrombosis: Pulmonary

  Hypothermia                         Thrombosis: Coronary
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Temperature Abnormalities -- Soibhan Kelley

Hypothermia

Background

-   Core temperature \<35°C (95°F). Mild 32-35C (90-95F), moderate
    28-32C (82-90F), or severe \<28C (82F) +/- pulseless

-   Ensure thermometer is "low-reading," standard thermometers not
    accurate

-   Core temperature can be measured w/ bladder catheter probe or
    esophageal probe (may be falsely ↑ if heated oxygen being
    delivered). Rectal temp can be used but is less accurate

-   Etiologies

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Heat loss: environmental, burns, iatrogenic (CRRT, cold IVF, massive
    transfusion protocol), vasodilatory drugs/toxins

-   Decreased heat production: endocrinopathies (hypothyroidism, adrenal
    insufficiency, hypopituitarism, hypoglycemia), thiamine deficiency

-   Impaired regulation: Spinal cord injury, hypothalamic lesions, drugs
    (classes including antihyperglycemics, beta blockers, sedatives,
    ETOH, alpha agonists, general anesthetics)

-   Multiple mechanisms: sepsis, pancreatitis, DKA

Evaluation

-   Infectious work-up

-   POC blood glucose, TSH/FT4, cortisol, lipase, UA, UDS, EtOH level,
    additional tox as appropriate, DKA work-up if relevant

-   Physical exam + history for exposures and trauma

-   CBC, CMP, Lactate, ABG, CK, PT/PTT, Fibrinogen

-   EKG

Management

-   Treat underlying cause \[see appropriate sections\]

-   Mild hypothermia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Passive external rewarming (PER): blankets, increase ambient
    temperature

-   Note that PER requires sufficient underlying physiologic reserve to
    generate heat. This is often impaired in elderly pts, malnutrition,
    sepsis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Moderate hypothermia, refractory mild hypothermia, or cardiovascular
    instability:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Active external rewarming (AER): forced warm air (ie Bair Hugger),
    heated blankets, heat lamps, hot packs (consider burn risk)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Severe hypothermia or refractory moderate hypothermia:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Active core rewarming: Warmed IV crystalloid (limited rewarming
    potential unless large volume but will decrease ongoing losses),
    warmed humidified inspired air, warmed bladder lavage

-   More extreme methods such as peritoneal/thoracic lavage more likely
    to be used in severe environmental cases in ED

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pulseless severe hypothermia ("You aren't dead unless you are warm
    and dead")

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Continue CPR until re-warmed as severe hypothermia is
    neuroprotective and pts can have good neurologic outcomes despite
    hours of CPR

-   ACLS medications and shocks will have poor effectiveness; prioritize
    circulation (i.e. chest compressions) and rewarming

-   Consider ECMO (likely venoarterial if pulseless); would need
    transfer to CVICU

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Identify and manage complications: bradycardia/heart block,
    arrhythmias, shock, coagulopathy/DIC, rhabdomyolysis; rebound
    hyperkalemia/hypoglycemia with rewarming

Fever and Hyperthermia

Background

-   Fever: T \>38.0°C (100.4°F) driven by hypothalamus activity in
    response to systemic triggers (i.e. cytokines); may use lower
    threshold for immunocompromised pts

-   Hyperthermia: T \>41.0 C (105.8°F) uncontrolled heat production with
    failure of thermoregulation

-   Infectious etiologies:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Considerations in the ICU include central-line associated blood
    stream infection, catheter-associated UTI, pneumonia (including
    ventilator-associated), sinusitis (esp. in pts with NGT or ETT),
    clostridium difficile, acalculous cholecystitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-infectious etiologies:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Drug fever

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Difficult to distinguish from other causes; Can begin hrs-wks after
    starting a drug

-   Sources: antibiotics (penicillins, cephalosporins, sulfonamides),
    anticonvulsants (phenytoin, carbamazepine, phenobarbital),
    allopurinol, heparin, dexmedetomidine

-   Drugs of abuse with sympathomimetic activity (cocaine, meth,
    ecstasy)

-   Anticholinergic or salicylate intoxication

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Idiosyncratic drug reactions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Serotonin syndrome

-   Neuroleptic malignant syndrome

-   Malignant hyperthermia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Transfusion reactions

-   PE/DVT

-   Endocrine: hyperthyroidism/thyroid storm, adrenal insufficiency

-   CNS pathology (intracranial bleed/stroke, particularly hypothalamic
    region)

-   Malignancy

-   Heat stroke (exertional or non-exertional)

-   Other inflammatory states: Pancreatitis, gout, pericarditis,
    pneumonitis

Evaluation

-   Infectious work-up +/- LP; may consider pan-scan if unable to
    identify source

-   POC glucose, BMP, LFT, Mg/Phos, CBC w/diff

-   Consider coags + fibrinogen (DIC), CK/UA (rhabdo), UDS,
    acetaminophen and salicylate levels, TSH/FT4, cortisol, lipase, ABG

-   Review medication list: antibiotics, serotonergic drugs,
    anti-psychotics, recent sedation for OR, or recently intubated with
    succinylcholine, dexmedetomidine

-   Consider CT/MRI head

Management

-   Treat underlying etiology \[see appropriate sections\]

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Serotonin syndrome -\> stop serotonergic drugs; add cyproheptadine

-   Malignant hyperthermia -\>activate malignant hyperthermia team; add
    dantrolene

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cooling

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Target \<38.0°C (100.4°F)

-   Surface cooling: Ice (bath, or ice packs more likely in our MICU),
    evaporative cooling with misted lukewarm water and fan

-   Internal cooling: Cold IV fluids, dry ventilation (evaporative) with
    non-humidified nasal cannula or vent circuit

-   Avoid shivering -\> give opiates (except in serotonin syndrome),
    precedex, propofol, benzos, ketamine

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Antipyretics

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acetaminophen, NSAIDs

-   Block prostaglandin-mediated temperature elevations

-   Effective for most causes of fever- infection, pancreatitis, DVT/PE,
    pneumonitis

-   AVOID for true hyperthermia (ineffective and potentially harmful)
    -\> neuroleptic malignant syndrome, malignant hyperthermia,
    serotonin syndrome, heat stroke

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Monitor for complications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Rhabdomyolysis, DIC, arrhythmias

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If high suspicion for infection and not improving on antibiotics,
    consider other infectious etiologies including fungal (ex: candida)

Endocrinology

Editor: Chloe de Crecy, MD

Reviewed by Sally Friedman, MD

Adrenal Incidentalomas -- Matthew Gonzalez

Background

-   Adrenal mass \>1cm, discovered by chance on radiographic imaging

-   Less than 1% are malignant

-   Supportive of benign: \<4cm in size, smooth borders, homogenous
    appearance, \<10 HU (Hounsfield units), rapid (\>50% washout)
    contrast washout (on \"adrenal phase\" imaging)

-   Supportive of malignancy: \>4cm in size, irregular borders, \> 20 HU
    on unenhanced CT, delayed contrast washout (\<50% washout), tumor
    calcifications, increase in size over time, presence in young pts
    and hx cancer

    Evaluation

-   All incidentalomas should be screened for pheochromocytoma (\~3%
    incidence) before operative intervention (24h urine fractionated
    metanephrines, catecholamines, plasma fractionated metanephrines)

-   Cortisol secreting adenoma (\~6% incidence) causing Cushing\'s
    syndrome: baseline serum DHEAS, low dose (1mg) overnight
    dexamethasone suppression test

-   Aldosterone secreting adenoma (\<1% incidence) causing
    hyperaldosteronism: if hypertensive (HTN) or hypokalemic order
    plasma aldosterone and renin, confirmatory testing with sodium
    loading (oral vs IV) and 24h urine aldosterone, sodium, and
    creatinine

    Management

-   If benign appearing and not hormone-producing: interval imaging in
    \~1 year, and repeat hormone work up

-   Unilateral adrenal incidentaloma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If progression free (stable size, and not hormone producing) can
    consider monitoring cessation after 4 years

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pheochromocytomas should undergo surgical evaluation for removal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Alpha blockade (phenoxybenzamine) + propranolol prior to resection
    to avoid HTN crisis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Aldosteronoma: should undergo surgical evaluation for definitive
    treatment; if unable to undergo surgery can use mineralocorticoid
    antagonist (e.g. spironolactone)

-   Cortisoloma: if clinical significant should undergo surgical
    removal, will need perioperative glucocorticoid administration to
    avoid iatrogenic adrenal insufficiency

-   Macroadenomas (masses \>4cm) are usually malignant and should be
    considered for surgical resection due to higher risk of carcinoma

-   Bilateral adrenal incidentalomas

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Surgical evaluation + will need adrenal venous sampling to confirm
    laterality in hormone producing tumors.

Additional information

-   There can be coexisting adrenal incidentaloma and bilateral
    secretion of aldosterone -- may require adrenal venous sampling to
    confirm

-   Not all hyperaldosterone states will have both HTN and hypokalemia

-   Subclinical Cushing\'s syndrome may be present based on initial
    dexamethasone suppression test, perform additional testing to
    determine if clinically significant

Adrenal Insufficiency -- Griffin Bullock

Background

-   Differential: Primary (Adrenals) vs Secondary (Pituitary):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Exogenous steroid use (\>10mg for \>3wks) undergoing severe
    physiologic stress or sudden discontinuation of steroid

-   Autoimmune adrenal insufficiency (Addison's)

-   Infection/Infiltration: tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, malignancy

-   Hemorrhage (Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome)

-   Pituitary mass/tumor, infarct, infiltration, surgery

-   Trauma

Presentation

-   Generalized weakness, lightheaded, abdominal pain, nausea, weight
    loss, fatigue

-   Lab Abnormalities: hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, hypoglycemia

Evaluation

-   Inpt Setting

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Draw AM cortisol and ACTH (ideally 8am) -\> 0.25mg cosyntropin -\>
    cortisol 1h after

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cortisol level ≥18-20 rules out primary adrenal insufficiency (and
    most secondary)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Outpt Setting

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Draw AM cortisol level for screening (\>15 rules typically rules out
    adrenal insufficiency)

-   ACTH stimulation for confirmation

Management

-   Consult endocrine if ACTH stimulation test is abnormal

-   Outpt: physiologic replacement doses usually with hydrocortisone
    (dosed 8am and \~2-4pm to mimic physiology). Can be dosed based on
    BSA or estimation based on weight. Ranges from \~20-40mg total daily
    (ex. 15mg AM, 10mg PM). Pt to increase if acute illness.

-   Adrenal crisis (if concerned, treat first, test later)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   BMP, glucose monitoring, ACTH level, serum cortisol

-   Fluid resuscitation: NS or D5NS. Do not use hypotonic saline.

-   Hydrocortisone 100mg x1 followed by 50mg q8h

Central Diabetes Insipidus -- Chloe de Crecy

Definition

-   Lack of antidiuretic hormone results in free water excreted at
    kidneys

    Etiology

-   Idiopathic, autoimmune, tumors (primary or secondary), infiltrative
    (Langerhans cell histiocytosis), congenital, trauma, surgery, severe
    shock/ischemia

    Presentation

-   Polyuria, nocturia, polydipsia

-   Elevated Na and osmolality, only if impaired thirst. Can be normal
    due to compensatory thirst

-   Decreased bone mineral density (unclear pathophysiology)

    Evaluation

-   1\. Confirm polyuria w/ low Uosm (DDx: psychogenic polydipsia,
    central DI, nephrogenic DI)

-   2\. Water restriction. If urine concentrates (Uosm\>700), it is
    primary polydipsia not DI.

-   3\. Desmopressin trial (after Na \>145) to differentiate between
    nephrogenic vs central. Central DI responds to desmopressin.

-   4\. MRI to investigate cause

    Management

-   Desmopressin (ADH analog) - PO, IV forms. Given at bedtime.

-   Goal: reduce nocturia to improve sleep

-   Risk: hyponatremia

Diabetic Ketoacidosis (DKA) -- Will Bassett, Matthew Gonzalez

Background

-   Classically in type 1 diabetes but can also occur in
    insulin-dependent type 2 diabetes

-   Definition: ↑ blood glucose (typically \>350) w/ high anion gap and
    ketones in blood/urine

-   If glucose is significantly elevated but little to no ketones/anion
    gap present, you likely have HHS, which is typically associated with
    ↑ serum osm and BG \> 600

Evaluation

-   Labs: BMP with anion gap (AG), CBC, phos, blood gas, serum osms, UA,
    consider beta-hydroxybutyrate

-   Workup aimed at discovering the underlying cause (The \"I's\"):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infection/ Inflammation: CBC, CXR, UA/UCx, LFTs; consider BCx,
    lipase (pancreatitis). Note: Leukocytosis will be present in DKA,
    even if infection isn't the precipitating factor

-   Ischemia (MI, CVA, mesenteric ischemia): EKG, Troponin, CT(A) if
    clinical suspicion

-   Intoxication - Ethanol (can cause ketosis with or without acidosis),
    cocaine, MDMA

-   Impregnation - Beta HCG if appropriate

-   Insulin-openia/Iatrogenic: steroids, SGLT2 inhibitors, other meds,
    insulin delivery failure (pump failure, insulin degraded by heat,
    etc.)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Remember to correct sodium for hyperglycemia (Na + 2.4mEq \*
    (BG-100))

Management

-   Initial monitoring: q2-4h BMPs (monitor K closely), q1h BG finger
    sticks

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can space less frequently once gap is closed x 2 and pt off insulin
    infusion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ensure IV access

-   Start IV fluids, insulin, and potassium as below

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Start insulin gtt

-   Start subcutaneous long-acting insulin as soon as insulin drip/IV
    insulin is started

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Either start home long-acting (dose reduce as needed) or if insulin
    naïve, Lantus 0.2-0.3u/kg/day

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lactated ringers' preferred fluid if no contraindication

-   Dextrose should be added when BG \<200 (or clear liquid diet)

-   Turn off insulin drip when anion gap is closed/bicarb has normalized
    on two consecutive BMPs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consult endocrinology early

-   Management algorithm on next page (Diabetes Care. 2009 Jul; 32(7):
    1335--1343)

-   Note: pts are usually deficient in total body potassium even if
    serum potassium is high

Additional Information

-   Pts on insulin drip can be admitted to stepdown (8MCE) with order
    set

-   Pts can be admitted to stepdown on a subcutaneous insulin protocol
    with mild DKA with endocrinology guiding insulin management

-   Avoid ordering C-peptide if concern for new type 1 diabetes, beta
    islet cells can be \"stunned\" with recent hyperglycemic states and
    may be falsely low

-   SGLT2 inhibitors, are being prescribed much more often and can cause
    a euglycemic DKA, where acidosis and ketosis present but no elevated
    BG

![A picture containing text, receipt Description automatically
generated](media/image19.jpg){width="3.838021653543307in"
height="2.585487751531059in"}

Hyperthyroidism -- Griffin Bullock, Lauren Waskowicz

Background

-   Excess thyroid hormone caused by increased synthesis, excessive
    release of preformed thyroid hormone or endogenous/exogenous release
    of hormone from extrathyroid source

-   Low TSH and High T4 and/or T3 (primary): Graves', Toxic goiter,
    TSH-producing adenoma, hyperemesis gravidarum, subacute
    granulomatous thyroiditis, amiodarone, radiation, excessive
    replacement, struma ovarii

-   Low TSH/Normal T4 and T3: Subclinical hyperthyroidism, central
    hypothyroidism, non-thyroidal illness, recovery from
    hyperthyroidism, pregnancy (physiologic)

-   Subclinical Hyperthyroidism: repeat testing to verify abnormality is
    not transient

Presentation

-   Sx: Heat intolerance, tremor, palpitations, anxiety, weight loss (w/
    normal/increased appetite), increased BM frequency, SOB

-   Physical Exam: Goiter, tachycardia/Afib, stare/lid lag, marked
    muscle weakness (rare presentation of thyrotoxic periodic
    paralysis), hyperreflexia

-   Graves Specific Findings: proptosis/exophthalmos, infiltrative
    dermopathy (localized or pretibial myxedema)

Evaluation

-   TSH, free T4, free T3 (only T3 or T4 may be elevated, though both
    often are)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Biotin affects assay, causes falsely ↓ TSH and falsely ↑ FT4/FT3

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CBC: may have a normocytic anemia due to increased plasma volume

![Shape Description automatically generated with low
confidence](media/image20.png){width="2.3191688538932635in"
height="2.5347222222222223in"}

Management

-   Methimazole, PTU, beta blockers, radioiodine ablation, surgery

-   Endocrine referral

Hypoglycemia -- Will Bassett

Background

-   Definition: BG \<70mg/dL

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Generally worse outcomes than hyperglycemia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Causes: infection, liver failure, iatrogenic (e.g. insulin not
    adjusted for AKI or being NPO)

-   Symptoms vary from tremor, palpitations, delirium, dizziness, AMS,
    coma (can mimic stroke)

Management

-   Give PO carbohydrate load (15-20g oral glucose) if pt is alert and
    tolerates PO

-   Give IV D50 if severe (\<50), or cannot take PO

-   Repeat measurements every 15 minutes in the first hour and treat
    again as needed

-   Give glucagon 0.5-1mg SQ/IM if no IV access and impaired
    consciousness

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Effect is transient and IV access should be obtained ASAP for
    glucose infusion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Do NOT hold basal insulin for T1DM: treat the low, then reduce dose
    if needed

Hypothyroidism -- Griffin Bullock

Background

-   Elevated TSH and low FT4 (primary hypothyroidism)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hashimoto's (autoimmune) thyroiditis, iodine deficiency, drugs
    (amiodarone, dopamine antagonists), adrenal insufficiency, thyroid
    hormone resistance (genetic), non-thyroidal illness (recovery
    phase), post-surgery or ablation for hyperthyroidism

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Elevated TSH and normal FT4: subclinical hypothyroidism

-   Low-Normal TSH, low FT4: central hypothyroidism, sick euthyroid

Presentation

-   Often non-specific and vague: fatigue, cold intolerance, weight
    gain, constipation, dry skin, myalgia, edema, menstrual
    irregularities, depression, mental dysfunction

-   Goiter, bradycardia, diastolic hypertension, delayed relaxation
    following reflex testing

-   Lab abnormalities: microcytic anemia, hypercholesterolemia,
    hyponatremia, elevated CK

Evaluation

-   TSH: If elevated repeat TSH and obtain T4

-   Lipid panel, CBC, BMP

Management

-   Treatment required if ↓ T4, significantly ↑ TSH (\>10), or symptoms
    with any lab abnormality

-   Titrate therapy to a normal TSH (unless central hypothyroidism, then
    target free T4 levels)

-   Observation of asymptomatic pts with subclinical hypothyroidism
    (normal T4, mild ↑ TSH)

-   Treatment is with formulation of T4 (full replacement is
    approximately 1.6 mcg/kg/day)

-   Initial Dose:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Young/healthy pts: full anticipated dose

-   Older pts or pts with CAD, atrial fibrillation: 25-50 mcg daily

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Increased doses required for: pregnancy, estrogen therapy, weight
    gain, PPI therapy, GI disorders (↓ absorption), ferrous sulfate
    therapy

-   Risks of overtreatment: cardiac effects, increase risk of
    osteoporosis

Additional information

-   Pts should take Levothyroxine alone, 1h prior to eating to ensure
    appropriate absorption. Calcium, iron, PPIs interfere the most with
    absorption.

-   Of note, missed doses can be taken along with the next dose.

-   Symptoms improve in 2-3 weeks. TSH steady state requires 6 weeks.

-   Dose can be titrated every 6 weeks based on TSH.

-   Pregnancy: Pregnancy causes lab changes due to differing levels
    thyroid binding globulin. Use tables based on trimester to interpret
    values.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TPO antibody testing should be conducted, as if abnormal this
    affects risk of complications

-   Hypothyroid pts are at increased risk for preeclampsia, placental
    abruption, preterm labor/delivery

-   Refer to endocrine for close monitoring and adjustment to avoid
    fetal complications

Inpt Diabetes Mellitus (DM) -- Will Bassett, Sebastian Hinojosa

Background

-   Blood glucose (BG) goal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Wards: \<140mg/dL fasting; \<180mg/dL random;

-   ICU: 140-180mg/dL (NICE-SUGAR Trial)

-   Avoiding hypoglycemia (≤70mg/dL) is more important than targeting
    ideal BG

-   For pts with terminal illness, limited life expectancy, or high risk
    for hypoglycemia (E.g. pts with liver disease, impaired kidney
    function, elderly, poor caloric intake, low BMI), a less aggressive
    insulin regimen and higher BG target ranges may be reasonable

-   Qs to ask diabetic pt inpt: Type, age of onset, outpt provider, home
    regimen, method of checking sugars, last HgbA1c, steroids,
    complications, hypoglycemia (episodes and awareness)

Management

-   Insulin therapy should be initiated for the treatment of persistent
    hyperglycemia starting at ≥180 mg/dL (checked on at least two
    occasions)

-   Basal (long acting), prandial (premeal, short acting), and
    correction (sliding scale) insulin is the preferred regimen for most
    pts

-   Initial orders on admission

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Typically HOLD all home oral diabetes medications

-   Order set "SUBCUTANEOUS INSULIN ORDER(S)"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hemoglobin A1c: Obtain on all pts with diabetes or hyperglycemia (BG
    \>140mg/dL) if not performed in the prior 3 months

-   Fingerstick blood glucose: Typically AC/HS (before meals and
    nightly)

-   Hypoglycemia management: Select all of these

-   Basal insulin: Select insulin glargine

    -   Type 2 DM, consider ↓ home dose (50-60% to home dose) as often
        inpts have reduced PO intake and ↓ renal function

    -   Type 1 DM, DO NOT hold basal insulin, and avoid ↓ \< 80% of home
        dose

    -   Insulin lispro meal: ↓ home dose by 50%, do not give while NPO

    -   Insulin lispro correction: Start with low or medium sliding
        scale and ↑ prn

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Carb-controlled or carb-restricted diet ('no concentrated sweets' at
    VA)

    Insulin adjustments

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If BGs persistently ≥180

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Calculate all insulin needs over 24h (basal + mealtime + sliding
    scale)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Give 50% as basal and other 50% as 3 divided mealtime doses

-   E.g. 10 basal + 0 mealtime + 14 sliding scale total = 24 units total
    daily = 12u basal + 4u TID with meals

-   In insulin naïve pts, consider weight-based dosing as outlined under
    additional information

-   In insulin naïve pts at high risk for hypoglycemia, may be
    reasonable to start with basal plus correctional insulin alone and
    readjust after 24-48 hours

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If BGs \< 70

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If overnight/AM, reduce basal insulin dose

-   If daytime/post-prandial hypoglycemia, reduce mealtime and sliding
    scale

-   If endocrine consulted for inpt glucose management, notify \>24h
    prior to discharge for recommended discharge regimen

Steroid-induced hyperglycemia

-   Steroids increase insulin resistance causing elevated postprandial
    BG

-   Insulin adjustments

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Double mealtime + correction dose while leaving basal dose the same

-   Modified basal-bolus regimen (30% basal, 70% bolus)

-   Add NPH once daily (weight + dose based, per below\*) if on daily
    prednisone

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Prednisone 10 mg = 0.1 u/kg NPH

-   Prednisone 20 mg = 0.2 u/kg NPH up to 0.4 u/kg daily

    -   \*lower dose if AKI, administer at the same time as prednisone
        dosing

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   On discharge, if steroids will be longstanding, increase home
    insulin regimen per inpt requirements. If steroids will be tapered
    or discontinued soon after, either continue hospital regimen for
    remainder of steroid course or return to home regimen (hyper
    \>hypoglycemia).

Additional Information

-   Weight-based insulin dosing

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Used when starting insulin on pts with type 2 DM who are insulin
    naïve and hyperglycemic in the hospital

-   Calculate total daily dosing (TDD) between 0.3 to 0.5 units/kg/day.
    Then split into 50% bolus and 50% as 3 divided prandial doses

-   E.g. 80kg pt using low start of 0.3 u/kg/day would have TDD of 24
    units. This equals 12u basal and 4u prandial insulin

-   Consider lower starting insulin TDD of 0.2 units/kg in pts at high
    risk for hypoglycemia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tube feeds

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For continuous tube feeds, dose regular insulin q6h (not TID AC as
    they don't have distinct "meals")

-   Consolidate for bolus feedings based on 24-hour insulin needs prior
    to discharge

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Insulin pumps

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Individuals who are comfortable using their diabetes devices, such
    as insulin pumps and CGM, should be allowed to use them in an inpt
    setting if they are well enough to care of the devices and have
    brought the necessary supplies. [This requires a Diabetes
    Consult.]{.underline}

-   Order POC BG checks AC/HS for nurse to chart and fill out MedEx pump
    contract

Outpt Diabetes -- Matthew Lu

Background

-   Type I Diabetes - insulin deficiency (GAD65, IA2, ZnT8 antibodies
    positive, Insulin and C-peptide inappropriately low)

-   Type II Diabetes - insulin resistance (generally associated with
    obesity)

-   Classification by HgA1c: Pre-diabetes: 5.7 to 6.4%; Diabetes: \>=
    6.5

Management:

-   Lifestyle changes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Exercise 175 minutes weekly

-   Caloric restriction for weight loss of 10%

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Low carb or Mediterranean diet, reduce normal portions by 10-20%,
    limit sugary drinks, drink large glass of water before meals

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   BP Goal generally \< 130/80

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ACE-inhibitor is first-line anti-hypertensive

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Manage complications of diabetes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Increased cardiovascular risk (2-4x risk of MI, CVA or death)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High intensity statin if clinical ASCVD present

-   Moderate intensity statin if age \> 40 or with ASCVD risk factors
    (LDL \>100, HTN, smoking, FHx of CVD, CKD)

-   Consider aspirin if ASCVD \> 10% (balanced against bleeding risk)

-   Smoking cessation

-   Baseline ECG at diagnosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Retinopathy -- annual retinal exams

-   Peripheral Neuropathy -- annual foot exams, can use gabapentin if
    present

-   Autonomic Neuropathy -- ED, orthostatic hypotension, gastroparesis

-   Nephropathy -- annual creatinine and urine microalbumin
    (albumin/creatinine ratio) - need repeat measurements 3mo apart to
    confirm albuminuria

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Normal: \< 30mg/g

-   Moderate albuminuria: 30-300 mg/g (consider starting ACE-I)

-   Severe albuminuria: \> 300 mg/g i(should be on ACE-I)

-   If persistent despite ACE-I, start SGLT2 inhibitor (if GFR allows)

-   If persistent despite SLGT2 inhibitor, start finerenone

-   Consider involving nephrology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Glycemic goals:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fasting glucose 80-130 mg/dL, postprandial (90-120 min after meal)
    \< 180mg/dL

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   A1c goal: generally \< 7%, \< 7.5% for 65 yrs, \< 8% for poor health
    or life expectancy \< 10 yrs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Medications for glycemic control

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For pre-diabetes, encourage lifestyle management and consider
    starting metformin

-   If initial HgA1c \< 9%

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   1^st^ agent: metformin (usually decreases HgA1c by 1-2%) -- start at
    500mg daily and increase by 500mg every 1-2 weeks if no GI side
    effects up to goal 2000mg daily

    -   If eGFR \< 45, then half dose

    -   If eGFR \< 30, then discontinue

-   2^nd^ agent (if HgA1c still not at goal within 3 months):

    -   GLP-1 agonist generally preferred (best weight loss benefit,
        usually decreases HgA1c by 1%)

    -   SGLT2 inhibitor preferred if pt has HF or DM nephropathy
        (usually decreases HgA1c by 1%)

    -   Consider sulfonylurea if pt on HD

-   3^rd^ agent (if HgA1c still not at goal after additional 3 months)

    -   GLP-1 agonist or SGLT2 inhibitor (whichever was not started as
        second agent)

-   If initial HgA1c \> 9%

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Start metformin AND GLP-1/DDP4-I OR insulin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   How to initiate insulin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Start with long-acting insulin nightly (10 units or 0.1 units/kg/d)

    -   Check fasting glucose daily and increase insulin by 2 units q
        2-3 days until fasting glucose within goal (80-130mg/dL)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If hypoglycemia occurs, decrease insulin by 4 units or 10%
    (whichever is greater)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If A1c \> 7% after 3mo, add mealtime insulin

    -   Check post-prandial glucose and start with 4 units short acting
        insulin at meals where post-prandial glucose \> 180. Adjust by 2
        units q 3 days until post-prandial glucose \< 180.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   When HgA1c \< 6.5% consider de-escalating medications

-   Other medication class options: sulfonylureas, DDP4-I,
    thiazolidinediones

Osteoporosis -- Claire Lo

Background

-   Definition: decreased bone mass leading to increased risk of
    fracture

-   Differential: malignancy (e.g., multiple myeloma), elder abuse
    (e.g., spiral fractures of long bones), hyperparathyroidism, Paget's
    disease

+-----------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| **              |                         |                          |
| Post-Menopausal |                         |                          |
| Women           |                         |                          |
| Pre-Menopausal  |                         |                          |
| Women**         |                         |                          |
+=================+=========================+==========================+
| Risk Factors    | current smoker, \>3     | Female Athlete Triad     |
|                 | alcoholic drinks/day,   | (disordered eating,      |
|                 | chronic glucocorticoids | amenorrhea, bone loss)   |
|                 | (\>4 weeks), previous   |                          |
|                 | fracture, parental      |                          |
|                 | history of fracture,    |                          |
|                 | RA, low-weight bearing  |                          |
|                 | status                  |                          |
+-----------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Presentation    | height loss, fragility  | repetitive long bone     |
|                 | fracture (GLF, minor    | stress fractures,        |
|                 | trauma)                 | atypical fractures       |
|                 |                         | (pubic ramus, femoral    |
|                 |                         | neck, non-metatarsal     |
|                 |                         | foot bones)              |
+-----------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Screening       | all women 65yo+ (Grade  | women \<65yo w/ clinical |
|                 | B USPSTF)               | risk factors via FRAX    |
|                 |                         | score (Grade B USPSTF)   |
+-----------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Tests           | Gold Standard: DEXA hip |                          |
|                 | and lumbar spine        |                          |
|                 |                         |                          |
|                 | Labs: 25\[OH\]D,        |                          |
|                 | calcium, phos, albumin, |                          |
|                 | total protein, LFTs     |                          |
|                 | (ALP), PTH              |                          |
+-----------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Diagnosis       | T score ≦ -2.5 at       |                          |
|                 | femoral neck or spine   |                          |
|                 | OR fragility fracture   |                          |
|                 | of vertebra, pelvis,    |                          |
|                 | wrist, humerus, rib     |                          |
+-----------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Management      | vitamin D               |                          |
|                 | supplementation,        |                          |
|                 | calcium if necessary,   |                          |
|                 | smoking cessation,      |                          |
|                 | weight bearing          |                          |
|                 | activity, Rx            |                          |
+-----------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+
| Monitoring      | DEXA q 2 years (for     |                          |
|                 | osteoporosis), q 4      |                          |
|                 | years (for osteopenia), |                          |
|                 | q15 years (for normal   |                          |
|                 | BMD).                   |                          |
+-----------------+-------------------------+--------------------------+

Evaluation

-   Interpretation of DEXA Score

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Osteoporosis: T score ≦ -2.5

-   Osteopenia: -1.0 \> T score \> -2.5

-   Normal bone mineral density: T score  -1.0

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Interpretation of FRAX (Fracture Risk Assessment Tool):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   10-year risk of major osteoporotic fracture (Google "FRAX tool.")

Pharmacologic Management

-   Indications: T score ≦ -2.5 (osteoporosis) OR -1.0 \> T score \>
    -2.5 with FRAX\>3% for hip fracture

-   First line: oral bisphosphonates (alendronate 10mg qd, at least
    30min before food)

-   If eGFR\<30: refer to endocrinology for IV zoledronic acid or IV
    denosumab

-   If severe (T score\< -3.0): consider anabolic (e.g., teriparatide)
    as first line agent

    Additional Information

-   There is currently no recommendation to screen men for osteoporosis.

-   Nodules that do not meet FNA criteria, US findings determine the
    timing for follow-up imaging:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High suspicion: 6-12mo

-   Low to intermediate suspicion: 12-24mo

-   Nodules \>1cm with very ↓ suspicion OR pure cyst: \>24mo if at all

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Nodules \<1cm with very ↓ suspicion OR pure cyst: no further imaging
    necessary

Outpt Medical Weight Loss -- Liana Mosley

Background

-   74% of US adults are overweight/obese

-   Target weight loss of 5-7% body weight for prevention of
    co-morbidities

-   In general, encourage lifestyle modifications (dietary
    interventions, exercise) first

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   See Obesity/Nutrition under Outpt Medicine

    Management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider referral to medical weight loss: BMI $\geq$ 30 or $\geq$ 27
    with with $\geq$ 1 co-morbidity

-   Referral to surgical weight loss: BMI $\geq$ 35 or $\geq$ 30 with
    with $\geq$ 1 co-morbidity

+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+
| Medical       |                |                |                   |
| Weight Loss   |                |                |                   |
+===============+================+================+===================+
| Medication    | Mechanism      | Side Effects   | Other             |
|               |                |                | considerations    |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+
| Metformin     | Unclear MOA,   | N/V/D, lactic  | 1st line, low     |
|               | potentially    | acidosis in    | cost, T2DM        |
|               | appetite       | renal failure  | pre               |
|               | suppression    |                | vention/treatment |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+
| Orlistat      | Reduces fat    | Fatty          | Significant side  |
| (Xenical)     | absorption     | diarrhea, gas, | effect profile    |
|               |                | abdominal pain |                   |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+
| Phentermi     | Appetite       | Constipation,  | Risk of rebound   |
| ne-topiramate | suppression,   | dizziness, dry | weight gain       |
| (Qsymia)      | early satiety  | mouth, taste   |                   |
|               |                | changes,       | Discontinuing can |
|               |                | anxiety,       | lead to           |
|               |                | insomnia, HTN, | withdrawal        |
|               |                | tachycardia,   |                   |
|               |                | cognitive      |                   |
|               |                | slowing        |                   |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+
| Phentermine   | Reduces        | Constipation,  | Risk of rebound   |
| (Ionamin)     | appetite,      | dizziness, dry | weight gain       |
|               |                | mouth, taste   |                   |
|               | FDA-approved   | changes,       | Discontinuing can |
|               | for short-term | anxiety,       | lead to           |
|               | use (up to 12  | insomnia, HTN, | withdrawal        |
|               | wks)           | tachycardia    |                   |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+
| Naltrex       | Appetite       | Constipation,  | Risk of rebound   |
| one-bupropion | suppression,   | diarrhea,      | weight gain       |
| (Contrave)    | early satiety  | dizziness, dry |                   |
|               |                | mouth, HA,     | Discontinuing can |
|               |                | increased BP,  | lead to           |
|               |                | tachycardia,   | withdrawal        |
|               |                | insomnia,      |                   |
|               |                | liver damage,  |                   |
|               |                | N/V, SI        |                   |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+
| Liraglutide   | GLP-1 agonist  | N/V/D,         | Contraindicated:  |
| (Saxenda)     |                | constipation,  | pancreatitis,     |
|               | Appetite       | abdominal      | medullary thyroid |
|               | suppression    | pain, HA,      | ca, MEN2A/MEN2B   |
|               |                | tachycardia,   |                   |
|               | Victoza: low   | dizziness,     |                   |
|               | dose           | injection site |                   |
|               | formulation,   | reaction,      |                   |
|               | FDA approved   | pancreatitis   |                   |
|               | for T2D but    |                |                   |
|               | not weight     |                |                   |
|               | loss           |                |                   |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+
| Semaglutide   | GLP-1 agonist  | N/V/D,         | STEP8 RCT:        |
| (Wegovy/      |                | abdominal      | Semaglutide       |
|               | Appetite       | pain,          | \>Liraglutide     |
| Ozempic/      | suppression    | constipation,  |                   |
|               |                | injection site | Contraindicated:  |
| Rybelsus)     | Rybelsus = PO  | reaction,      | pancreatitis,     |
|               | option, FDA    | pancreatitis   | medullary thyroid |
|               | approved for   |                | ca, MEN2A/MEN2B   |
|               | T2D but not    |                |                   |
|               | weight loss    |                |                   |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+
| Tirzepatide   | GLP-1          | N/V/D,         | T2DM: superior to |
| (Mounjaro)    | agonist + GIP  | abdominal      | GLP1 agonist      |
|               | receptor       | pain,          | (lowered A1c      |
|               | agonist (first | constipation,  | 2.0-2.5%)         |
|               | in class)      | injection site |                   |
|               |                | reaction,      | Obesity: weight   |
|               |                | pancreatitis   | loss of 15-20%    |
|               |                |                | from bl           |
|               |                |                |                   |
|               |                |                | Contraindicated:  |
|               |                |                | pancreatitis,     |
|               |                |                | medullary thyroid |
|               |                |                | ca, MEN2A/MEN2B   |
+---------------+----------------+----------------+-------------------+

Panhypopituitarism -- Chloe de Crecy

Etiology

-   Originates from hypothalamus vs anterior pituitary. Time course:
    acute vs insidious.

-   Hypothalamic: mass (benign vs malignant), radiation, infiltrative dz
    (sarcoid), infections (TB), TBI, stroke

-   Pituitary: mass (adenoma, cysts), surgery, radiation, infiltrative
    dz (hypophysitis, hemochromatosis), infection, infarction, apoplexy,
    genetic mutations, empty sella

    Evaluation

-   Not all hormones are always affected. Secretion of GH and
    gonadotropins more likely affected than ACTH and TSH .

-   Consult Endocrine

+-------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+
| HPA Axis    | Symptoms      | Testing          | Replacement        |
+=============+===============+==================+====================+
| CRH -- ACTH | Fatigue,      | AM cortisol()   | Hydrocortisone     |
| -- Cortisol | weight loss,  |                  | (\~15-25mg total   |
|             | hypoglycemia  | ACTH ()         | daily)             |
| (Adrenals)  |               |                  |                    |
|             |               | Cosyntropin Stim | Prednisone         |
|             |               | test             |                    |
+-------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+
| TRH -- TSH  | Fatigue, cold | TSH, T4, T3 (all | Levothyroxine      |
| -- T4/T3    | intolerance,  | )               |                    |
|             | constipation, |                  |                    |
| (Thyroid)   | bradycardia,  |                  |                    |
|             | skin changes, |                  |                    |
|             | anemia,       |                  |                    |
|             | delayed       |                  |                    |
|             | reflexes      |                  |                    |
+-------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+
| GnRH --     | Hypogonadism  | F w/ amennorhea: | F: estradiol (+    |
| LH/FSH -    |               | LH, FSH,         | progestin if       |
| Estrogen,   | F:            | estradiol,       | uterus)            |
| androgens   | anovulation,  | med              |                    |
|             | hot flashes,  | roxyprogesterone | M:                 |
| (Gonads)    | vaginal       | challenge        | Testos             |
|             | atrophy,      | (withdrawal      | terone (injection, |
|             | decreased     | bleeding)        | gel, patch) or hCG |
|             | bone density  |                  | if trying to       |
|             |               | M: LH            | conceive           |
|             | M: decreased  |                  |                    |
|             | e             |                  |                    |
|             | nergy/libido, |                  |                    |
|             | low energy,   |                  |                    |
|             | decreased     |                  |                    |
|             | muscle mass,  |                  |                    |
|             | decreased     |                  |                    |
|             | sp            |                  |                    |
|             | ermatogenesis |                  |                    |
+-------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+
| GHRH --     | Children:     | IGF-1 ()        | Recombinant growth |
| Growth      | short stature |                  | hormone            |
| hormone --  |               |                  |                    |
| liver, fat  | Adults:       |                  |                    |
|             | decrease in   |                  |                    |
|             | lean body     |                  |                    |
|             | mass,         |                  |                    |
|             | decrease in   |                  |                    |
|             | bone density, |                  |                    |
|             | dyslipidemia  |                  |                    |
+-------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+
| Dopamine    | Inhibited     | Not done         | Not done           |
| (in         | lactation     |                  |                    |
| hibitor) -- |               |                  |                    |
| Prolactin   |               |                  |                    |
| -- mammary  |               |                  |                    |
| glands      |               |                  |                    |
+-------------+---------------+------------------+--------------------+

Severe Hypertriglyceridemia (HTG) -- Chloe de Crecy

Background

-   Elevated triglycerides (TG) on a [fasting]{.underline} lipid panel

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Normal: \<150 mg/dL

-   Moderate HTG: 150-499 mg/dL

-   Moderate to severe HTG: 500-999 mg/dL

-   Severe HTG: \>1000 mg/dL

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Nearly all pts with severe HTG have a genetic predisposition +
    additional risk factor (e.g. DM, alcohol abuse, oral estrogen,
    hypothyroidism, nephrotic syndrome, propofol, ART)

-   Risks of hypertriglyceridemia: pancreatitis (requires serum TG \>500
    mg/dL), ASCVD

-   Signs: xanthomas, hepatosplenomegaly, lipemia retinalis, milky
    appearance of plasma

-   Sxs: short-term memory loss, abdominal pain, flushing with ETOH

Evaluation

-   Lipid panel: usual outpt screening, acute pancreatitis, cutaneous
    xanthomas, familial HTG, monitoring HTG treatment

-   Note: Na, glucose, amylase, LDL readings can be affected by HTG

-   Consider sending A1c, Cr, TSH

-   Assess medication list for secondary causes

Management

-   HTG induced pancreatitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If pt has hypocalcemia, lactic acidosis, or multi-organ dysfunction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Initiate plasmapheresis and monitor serum TG after each cycle until
    \<500

-   Severe dietary fat restriction (\<5%) until TG \<1000

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If none of the above and pt is hyperglycemic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Start insulin gtt, IVF, monitor q1h BG and q12h TG

-   Discontinue insulin when serum TG \<500

-   Severe dietary fat restriction (\<5%) until TG \<1000

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If none of the above and pt is euglycemic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Start insulin gtt + dextrose, Monitor q12h TG until \<500

-   Severe dietary fat restriction (\<5%) until TG \<1000

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Long-term Management (once TG \<1000, otherwise decreased efficacy)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pharmacologic: fibrates (most commonly fenofibrate), statins,
    niacin, omega-3 fatty acids

-   Nonpharmacologic: discontinue ETOH use, dietary fat and sugar
    restriction (target fat intake at \<10% of calorie intake), exercise

Steroid Conversion Chart -- Neil Phillips

+--------------------+-------------+-----------------------+----------+
| Drug Name          | Equivalent  | Anti-inflammatory     | Duration |
|                    | doses (mg)  | activity relative to  | of       |
|                    |             | hydrocortisone        |          |
|                    |             |                       | action   |
|                    |             |                       | (hrs)    |
+====================+=============+=======================+==========+
| Hydrocortisone     | 20          | 1                     | 8 to 12  |
| (cortisol)         |             |                       |          |
+--------------------+-------------+-----------------------+----------+
| Cortisone acetate  | 25          | 0.8                   | 8 to 12  |
+--------------------+-------------+-----------------------+----------+
| Prednisone         | 5           | 4                     | 12 to 36 |
+--------------------+-------------+-----------------------+----------+
| Prednisolone       | 5           | 4                     | 12 to 36 |
+--------------------+-------------+-----------------------+----------+
| Methylprednisolone | 4           | 5                     | 12 to 36 |
+--------------------+-------------+-----------------------+----------+
| Triamcinolone      | 4           | 5                     | 12 to 36 |
+--------------------+-------------+-----------------------+----------+
| Dexamethasone      | 0.75        | 30                    | 36 to 72 |
+--------------------+-------------+-----------------------+----------+
| Betamethasone      | 0.6         | 30                    | 36 to 72 |
+--------------------+-------------+-----------------------+----------+

Stress Dose Steroids -- Griffin Bullock

Primary Options

-   Dexamethasone 4mg IV: does not affect cortisol assays, ideal if
    diagnosis uncertain

-   Hydrocortisone 100mg IV bolus then 50mg q8h until stable: greater
    mineralocorticoid activity. Ideal if adrenal insufficiency
    known/confirmed or if hyperkalemic (K\>6.0)

When to Use

-   Concern for adrenal crisis

-   Pts with known adrenal insufficiency:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Minor Illness: ↑ dose x3 for 3 d or until clinically improved &
    acute stress resolved

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Surgery: dependent on severity of operation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Minor (e.g. hernia repair): hydrocortisone 25mg for 1 day

-   Moderate (e.g. cholecystectomy): 50-75mg day of surgery and post-op
    day 1

-   Major (e.g. CABG): 100-150mg daily 2-3 days (would consult endocrine
    in

Thyroid Nodules -- Terra Swanson

Background

-   \~50% of adults will have a thyroid nodule on ultrasound

-   Benign: goiter, cyst, inflammatory, Hashimoto's, follicular adenoma
    (microadenoma)

-   Malignant: follicular, papillary, medullary, anaplastic, metastatic,
    thyroid lymphoma

-   Risk factors for malignancy: age \<30, head or neck radiation,
    family history of thyroid cancer

Evaluation

-   Initial work-up after a nodule is found (either clinically or
    incidentally on imaging)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TSH, Free T4, Thyroid U/S

Management

-   If Low TSH: Likely a hyperfunctioning nodule (benign in 95% of
    cases)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Order Iodine-123 or technetium-99m thyroid scan

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If hyperfunctioning → measure T3/free T4 if ↑, treat for
    hyperthyroidism

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If non-functioning → proceed as if TSH were normal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Normal or elevated TSH:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   FNA indicated based on U/S findings listed below (determined by
    TI-RADS system)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Nodules \>1cm that have high- or intermediate-suspicion pattern

-   Nodules \>1.5cm that have low-suspicion pattern

-   Nodules \>2cm that have very-low-suspicion pattern

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   FNA cytology determines the plan of action:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Benign → periodic US monitoring at 12-24mo, then at increasing
    intervals

-   Indeterminate → repeat FNA in 3-12 months

-   Malignant → surgical referral

Thyroid Storm -- Gaby Schroeder

Background

-   Diagnosis is based on recognition of exaggerated signs/symptoms of
    thyrotoxicosis leading to multi-organ dysfunction in the setting of
    precipitating event

-   Common Precipitants: Grave's Disease, surgery, trauma, pregnancy,
    stress, infection, MI/PE, medication non-compliance, iodine loads

-   Use Burch-Wartofsky Point Scale (BWPS); available on MD Calc

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \>45 highly suggestive

-   25-44 impending storm

-   \<25 unlikely to represent storm

Management

-   ENDOCRINE EMERGENCY - if suspected consult Endocrine ASAP

-   Therapies directed towards thyroid gland

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PTU: Preferred, 500-1000mg loading dose, followed by 250mg q4 -6
    hours (PO, rectal)

-   Methimazole: q4-6 hours, dose varies (PO, rectal, IV)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Therapies directed toward decreasing T4 to T3 conversion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Propranolol (60-80mg PO q4)

-   Hydrocortisone (300mg x1, 100mg q8) - treats high incidence of
    co-existing adrenal insufficiency

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cholestyramine 4g QID can be considered to reduce enteric
    recirculation

-   Refractory Storm: plasmapheresis and plasma exchange

-   Close hemodynamic monitoring, may need vasopressors (consider
    transfer to ICU)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Trauma, critical illness, or unclear give stress dose

Gastroenterology

Editor: Kathryn Welp, MD

Reviewed by Dhyanesh A. Patel, MD

Acute Abdominal Pain -- Mahsima Shabani

General Approach

-   Rule out life threatening causes:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Obstruction, volvulus, peritonitis, perforation, acute mesenteric
    ischemia, aortic dissection or AAA rupture, acute MI, ectopic
    pregnancy,

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   History: pain location/radiation/quality/severity/timing, prior
    episodes, aggravating and alleviating factors (eating, bowel
    movements, position), nausea/emesis, changes in urine/stool, gas,
    constitutional symptoms, LMP, sexual history, Alcohol, NSAID and
    antibiotic use.

-   Initial work-up: CBC, BMP, POC Gluc, LFTs, INR, lactate, lipase,
    U/A, urine hCG, abdominal US

+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| System   |   | Causes      |   | Common features     |   | Workup     |
+==========+===+=============+===+=====================+===+============+
| E        | E |             | E |                     | T |            |
| sophagus | s |             | p |                     | r |            |
|          | o |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          | p |             | g |                     | a |            |
|          | h |             | a |                     | l |            |
|          | a |             | s |                     | P |            |
|          | g |             | t |                     | P |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     | I |            |
|          | t |             | i |                     | , |            |
|          | i |             | c |                     | n |            |
|          | s |             | p |                     | y |            |
|          | - |             | a |                     | s |            |
|          | - |             | i |                     | t |            |
|          | G |             | n |                     | a |            |
|          | E |             | , |                     | t |            |
|          | R |             | n |                     | i |            |
|          | D |             | o |                     | n |            |
|          | , |             | c |                     | s |            |
|          | E |             | t |                     | w |            |
|          | O |             | u |                     | i |            |
|          | E |             | r |                     | s |            |
|          | , |             | n |                     | h |            |
|          | c |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          | a |             | l |                     | n |            |
|          | n |             | r |                     | d |            |
|          | d |             | e |                     | s |            |
|          | i |             | f |                     | w |            |
|          | d |             | l |                     | a |            |
|          | a |             | u |                     | l |            |
|          | , |             | x |                     | l |            |
|          | H |             | , |                     | o |            |
|          | S |             | o |                     | w |            |
|          | V |             | d |                     | , |            |
|          | , |             | y |                     | c |            |
|          | C |             | n |                     | o |            |
|          | M |             | o |                     | n |            |
|          | V |             | p |                     | s |            |
|          | , |             | h |                     | i |            |
|          | p |             | a |                     | d |            |
|          | i |             | g |                     | e |            |
|          | l |             | i |                     | r |            |
|          | l |             | a |                     | E |            |
|          | , |             | , |                     | G |            |
|          | f |             | d |                     | D |            |
|          | u |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          | c |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          | o |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          | l |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | I |             | U |                     | C |            |
|          | n |             | p |                     | X |            |
|          | t |             | p |                     | R |            |
|          | r |             | e |                     | ( |            |
|          | a |             | r |                     | f |            |
|          | - |             | a |                     | r |            |
|          | a |             | b |                     | e |            |
|          | b |             | d |                     | e |            |
|          | d |             | o |                     | p |            |
|          | o |             | m |                     | e |            |
|          | m |             | i |                     | r |            |
|          | i |             | n |                     | i |            |
|          | n |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          | a |             | l |                     | o |            |
|          | l |             | p |                     | n |            |
|          | e |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          | s |             | i |                     | a |            |
|          | o |             | n |                     | l |            |
|          | p |             | ; |                     | a |            |
|          | h |             | r |                     | i |            |
|          | a |             | e |                     | r |            |
|          | g |             | c |                     | ) |            |
|          | e |             | e |                     | , |            |
|          | a |             | n |                     | C |            |
|          | l |             | t |                     | T |            |
|          | r |             | t |                     | c |            |
|          | u |             | r |                     | h |            |
|          | p |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          | t |             | u |                     | s |            |
|          | u |             | m |                     | t |            |
|          | r |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          | e |             | , |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ( |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | B |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ) |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| Stomach  | P |             | E |                     | C |            |
|          | e |             | p |                     | B |            |
|          | p |             | i |                     | C |            |
|          | t |             | g |                     | , |            |
|          | i |             | a |                     | E |            |
|          | c |             | s |                     | G |            |
|          | u |             | t |                     | D |            |
|          | l |             | r |                     | , |            |
|          | c |             | i |                     | H |            |
|          | e |             | c |                     | . |            |
|          | r |             | p |                     | p |            |
|          | d |             | a |                     | y |            |
|          | i |             | i |                     | l |            |
|          | s |             | n |                     | o |            |
|          | e |             | , |                     | r |            |
|          | a |             | b |                     | i |            |
|          | s |             | e |                     | t |            |
|          | e |             | t |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ± |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | S |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | I |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | D |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | G |             | B |                     | H |            |
|          | a |             | u |                     | . |            |
|          | s |             | r |                     | p |            |
|          | t |             | n |                     | y |            |
|          | r |             | i |                     | l |            |
|          | i |             | n |                     | o |            |
|          | t |             | g |                     | r |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          | s |             | p |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | I |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | ± |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | E |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | D |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | S |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | I |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | D |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | E |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | T |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | O |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | H |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | G |             | N |                     | S |            |
|          | a |             | / |                     | c |            |
|          | s |             | V |                     | i |            |
|          | t |             | , |                     | n |            |
|          | r |             | e |                     | t |            |
|          | o |             | a |                     | i |            |
|          | p |             | r |                     | g |            |
|          | a |             | l |                     | r |            |
|          | r |             | y |                     | a |            |
|          | e |             | s |                     | p |            |
|          | s |             | a |                     | h |            |
|          | i |             | t |                     | y |            |
|          | s |             | i |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | x |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | D |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | M |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| Liver    | H |             | R |                     | L |            |
|          | e |             | U |                     | F |            |
|          | p |             | Q |                     | T |            |
|          | a |             | p |                     | s |            |
|          | t |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          | i |             | i |                     | L |            |
|          | t |             | n |                     | D |            |
|          | i |             | , |                     | H |            |
|          | s |             | m |                     | , |            |
|          | : |             | a |                     | A |            |
|          | I |             | l |                     | l |            |
|          | s |             | a |                     | b |            |
|          | c |             | i |                     | , |            |
|          | h |             | s |                     | I |            |
|          | e |             | e |                     | N |            |
|          | m |             | , |                     | R |            |
|          | i |             | N |                     | , |            |
|          | c |             | / |                     | E |            |
|          | , |             | V |                     | T |            |
|          | V |             | , |                     | O |            |
|          | i |             | a |                     | H |            |
|          | r |             | n |                     | , |            |
|          | a |             | o |                     | T |            |
|          | l |             | r |                     | y |            |
|          | , |             | e |                     | l |            |
|          | E |             | x |                     | e |            |
|          | T |             | i |                     | n |            |
|          | O |             | a |                     | o |            |
|          | H |             | ± |                     | l |            |
|          | , |             | j |                     | l |            |
|          | t |             | a |                     | v |            |
|          | r |             | u |                     | l |            |
|          | a |             | n |                     | , |            |
|          | u |             | d |                     | v |            |
|          | m |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          | a |             | c |                     | r |            |
|          | , |             | e |                     | a |            |
|          | t |             | , |                     | l |            |
|          | o |             | d |                     | p |            |
|          | x |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     | n |            |
|          | n |             | k |                     | e |            |
|          | s |             | u |                     | l |            |
|          | , |             | r |                     | , |            |
|          | a |             | i |                     | R |            |
|          | u |             | n |                     | U |            |
|          | t |             | e |                     | Q |            |
|          | o |             | , |                     | U |            |
|          | i |             | l |                     | / |            |
|          | m |             | i |                     | S |            |
|          | m |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          | u |             | h |                     | + |            |
|          | n |             | t |                     | d |            |
|          | e |             | s |                     | o |            |
|          | , |             | t |                     | p |            |
|          | c |             | o |                     | p |            |
|          | o |             | o |                     | l |            |
|          | n |             | l |                     | e |            |
|          | g |             | s |                     | r |            |
|          | e |             | ; |                     | s |            |
|          | s |             | h |                     | ; |            |
|          | t |             | x |                     | C |            |
|          | i |             | o |                     | T |            |
|          | v |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          | e |             | E |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | O |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | H |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | T |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | I |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | D |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | P |             | R |                     | B |            |
|          | e |             | U |                     | i |            |
|          | r |             | Q |                     | m |            |
|          | i |             | p |                     | a |            |
|          | h |             | a |                     | n |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | u |            |
|          | p |             | n |                     | a |            |
|          | a |             | a |                     | l |            |
|          | t |             | n |                     | e |            |
|          | i |             | d |                     | x |            |
|          | t |             | t |                     | a |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     | m |            |
|          | s |             | n |                     | , |            |
|          | ( |             | d |                     | b |            |
|          | F |             | e |                     | e |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     | t |            |
|          | t |             | n |                     | a |            |
|          | z |             | e |                     | - |            |
|          | - |             | s |                     | h |            |
|          | H |             | s |                     | C |            |
|          | u |             | w |                     | G |            |
|          | g |             | i |                     | , |            |
|          | h |             | t |                     | N |            |
|          | - |             | h |                     | A |            |
|          | C |             | p |                     | A |            |
|          | u |             | l |                     | T |            |
|          | r |             | e |                     | f |            |
|          | t |             | u |                     | o |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     | r |            |
|          | s |             | i |                     | C |            |
|          | s |             | t |                     | h |            |
|          | y |             | i |                     | l |            |
|          | n |             | c |                     | a |            |
|          | d |             | c |                     | m |            |
|          | r |             | o |                     | y |            |
|          | o |             | m |                     | d |            |
|          | m |             | p |                     | i |            |
|          | e |             | o |                     | a |            |
|          | ) |             | n |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | H |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | I |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | V |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | v |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | U |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | S |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | L |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | T |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | S |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | T |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | L |             | F |                     | U |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     | S |            |
|          | v |             | v |                     | , |            |
|          | e |             | e |                     | C |            |
|          | r |             | r |                     | T |            |
|          | a |             | w |                     | a |            |
|          | b |             | i |                     | b |            |
|          | s |             | t |                     | d |            |
|          | c |             | h |                     | o |            |
|          | e |             | R |                     | m |            |
|          | s |             | U |                     | e |            |
|          | s |             | Q |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | B |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | x |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | D |                     | x |            |
|          |   |             | M |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | U |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | S |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | - |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | P |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | P |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | I |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | B |             | F |                     | D |            |
|          | u |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          | d |             | v |                     | p |            |
|          | d |             | e |                     | p |            |
|          | - |             | r |                     | l |            |
|          | C |             | , |                     | e |            |
|          | h |             | a |                     | r |            |
|          | i |             | b |                     | U |            |
|          | a |             | d |                     | S |            |
|          | r |             | o |                     | o |            |
|          | i |             | m |                     | f |            |
|          | s |             | i |                     | l |            |
|          | y |             | n |                     | i |            |
|          | n |             | a |                     | v |            |
|          | d |             | l |                     | e |            |
|          | r |             | , |                     | r |            |
|          | o |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          | m |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          | e |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | j |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | G |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | I |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | B |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | + |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | H |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | E |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | O |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | C |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | P |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | I |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | M |             | U |                     | A |            |
|          | a |             | p |                     | b |            |
|          | l |             | p |                     | d |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          | g |             | r |                     | m |            |
|          | n |             | a |                     | i |            |
|          | a |             | b |                     | n |            |
|          | n |             | d |                     | a |            |
|          | c |             | o |                     | l |            |
|          | y |             | m |                     | U |            |
|          | , |             | i |                     | S |            |
|          | H |             | n |                     | , |            |
|          | C |             | a |                     | A |            |
|          | C |             | l |                     | F |            |
|          | , |             | p |                     | P |            |
|          | m |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | C |            |
|          | t |             | n |                     | T |            |
|          | s |             | , |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | ( |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | ) |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| Spleen   | S |             | L |                     | L |            |
|          | p |             | U |                     | F |            |
|          | l |             | Q |                     | T |            |
|          | e |             | p |                     | , |            |
|          | n |             | a |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | i |                     | B |            |
|          | m |             | n |                     | C |            |
|          | e |             | , |                     | , |            |
|          | g |             | + |                     | s |            |
|          | a |             | / |                     | m |            |
|          | l |             | - |                     | e |            |
|          | y |             | l |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | S |             | S |                     | E |            |
|          | p |             | e |                     | C |            |
|          | l |             | v |                     | G |            |
|          | e |             | e |                     | f |            |
|          | n |             | r |                     | o |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     | r |            |
|          | c |             | L |                     | A |            |
|          | i |             | U |                     | F |            |
|          | n |             | Q |                     | i |            |
|          | f |             | p |                     | b |            |
|          | a |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          | r |             | i |                     | c |            |
|          | c |             | n |                     | o |            |
|          | t |             | ; |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | y |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | w |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | F |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | a |             | F |                     | C |            |
|          | b |             | e |                     | T |            |
|          | s |             | v |                     | , |            |
|          | c |             | e |                     | B |            |
|          | e |             | r |                     | C |            |
|          | s |             | a |                     | x |            |
|          | s |             | n |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | L |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | U |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | Q |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | - |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | x |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | e |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | S |             | L |                     | C |            |
|          | p |             | e |                     | T |            |
|          | l |             | f |                     | , |            |
|          | e |             | t |                     | s |            |
|          | n |             | s |                     | u |            |
|          | i |             | h |                     | r |            |
|          | c |             | o |                     | g |            |
|          | r |             | u |                     | e |            |
|          | u |             | l |                     | r |            |
|          | p |             | d |                     | y |            |
|          | t |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          | u |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          | r |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          | e |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | P |             | A |                     | D |            |
|          | o |             | b |                     | o |            |
|          | r |             | d |                     | p |            |
|          | t |             | o |                     | p |            |
|          | a |             | m |                     | l |            |
|          | l |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          | v |             | n |                     | r |            |
|          | e |             | a |                     | U |            |
|          | i |             | l |                     | S |            |
|          | n |             | p |                     | , |            |
|          | t |             | a |                     | C |            |
|          | h |             | i |                     | T |            |
|          | r |             | n |                     | a |            |
|          | o |             | , |                     | b |            |
|          | m |             | d |                     | d |            |
|          | b |             | y |                     | o |            |
|          | u |             | s |                     | m |            |
|          | s |             | p |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | G |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | I |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | B |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| Biliary  | B |             | R |                     | L |            |
|          | i |             | U |                     | F |            |
|          | l |             | Q |                     | T |            |
|          | i |             | o |                     | s |            |
|          | a |             | r |                     | , |            |
|          | r |             | e |                     | R |            |
|          | y |             | p |                     | U |            |
|          | c |             | i |                     | Q |            |
|          | o |             | g |                     | U |            |
|          | l |             | a |                     | S |            |
|          | i |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          | c |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | + |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | \ |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | > |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | 3 |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | 0 |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ♀ |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | 4 |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | 0 |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ' |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | C |             | P |                     | L |            |
|          | h |             | r |                     | F |            |
|          | o |             | o |                     | T |            |
|          | l |             | l |                     | s |            |
|          | e |             | o |                     | , |            |
|          | c |             | n |                     | R |            |
|          | y |             | g |                     | U |            |
|          | s |             | e |                     | Q |            |
|          | t |             | d |                     | U |            |
|          | i |             | \ |                     | S |            |
|          | t |             | > |                     | , |            |
|          | i |             | 4 |                     | H |            |
|          | s |             | h |                     | I |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | D |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | R |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | U |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | Q |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | M |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ' |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | C |             | R |                     | C |            |
|          | h |             | U |                     | B |            |
|          | o |             | Q |                     | C |            |
|          | l |             | p |                     | , |            |
|          | e |             | a |                     | L |            |
|          | d |             | i |                     | F |            |
|          | o |             | n |                     | T |            |
|          | c |             | , |                     | s |            |
|          | h |             | N |                     | , |            |
|          | o |             | / |                     | R |            |
|          | l |             | V |                     | U |            |
|          | i |             | w |                     | Q |            |
|          | t |             | i |                     | U |            |
|          | h |             | t |                     | / |            |
|          | i |             | h |                     | S |            |
|          | a |             | j |                     | , |            |
|          | s |             | a |                     | B |            |
|          | i |             | u |                     | C |            |
|          | s |             | n |                     | x |            |
|          | / |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          | c |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | h |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          | o |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          | l |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          | g |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          | s |             | + |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | M |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | S |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | S |             | B |                     | L |            |
|          | p |             | i |                     | F |            |
|          | h |             | l |                     | T |            |
|          | i |             | i |                     | s |            |
|          | n |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          | c |             | r |                     | R |            |
|          | t |             | y |                     | U |            |
|          | e |             | t |                     | Q |            |
|          | r |             | y |                     | U |            |
|          | o |             | p |                     | S |            |
|          | f |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          | O |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          | d |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          | d |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          | d |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          | y |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | s |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          | f |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          | u |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          | c |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          | o |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | L |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | F |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | T |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ( |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ) |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| Pancreas | A |             | P |                     | L |            |
|          | c |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          | u |             | r |                     | p |            |
|          | t |             | s |                     | a |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | s |            |
|          | o |             | s |                     | e |            |
|          | r |             | t |                     | , |            |
|          | c |             | e |                     | C |            |
|          | h |             | n |                     | T |            |
|          | r |             | t |                     | A |            |
|          | o |             | e |                     | / |            |
|          | n |             | p |                     | P |            |
|          | i |             | i |                     | ( |            |
|          | c |             | g |                     | r |            |
|          | p |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          | a |             | s |                     | r |            |
|          | n |             | t |                     | e |            |
|          | c |             | r |                     | l |            |
|          | r |             | i |                     | y |            |
|          | e |             | c |                     | n |            |
|          | a |             | p |                     | e |            |
|          | t |             | a |                     | c |            |
|          | i |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          | t |             | n |                     | s |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     | s |            |
|          | s |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | y |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | w |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | 2 |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | 4 |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | - |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | 4 |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     | 8 |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     | ) |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | R |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     | U |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | Q |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | U |            |
|          |   |             | E |                     | S |            |
|          |   |             | T |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             | O |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | H |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | . |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| In       | G |             | D |                     | S |            |
| testines | a |             | i |                     | u |            |
|          | s |             | a |                     | p |            |
|          | t |             | r |                     | p |            |
|          | r |             | r |                     | o |            |
|          | o |             | h |                     | r |            |
|          | e |             | e |                     | t |            |
|          | n |             | a |                     | i |            |
|          | t |             | w |                     | v |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          | r |             | t |                     | c |            |
|          | i |             | h |                     | a |            |
|          | t |             | N |                     | r |            |
|          | i |             | / |                     | e |            |
|          | s |             | V |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | D |             | O |                     | C |            |
|          | i |             | l |                     | B |            |
|          | v |             | d |                     | C |            |
|          | e |             | e |                     | , |            |
|          | r |             | r |                     | C |            |
|          | t |             | , |                     | T |            |
|          | i |             | h |                     | A |            |
|          | c |             | / |                     | / |            |
|          | u |             | o |                     | P |            |
|          | l |             | d |                     | w |            |
|          | i |             | i |                     | c |            |
|          | t |             | v |                     | o |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     | n |            |
|          | s |             | r |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | L |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | L |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | Q |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ( |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | R |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | L |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | Q |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ) |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | + |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | S |             | F |                     | D |            |
|          | B |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          | P |             | v |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | M |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | S |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | C |             | H |                     | K |            |
|          | o |             | x |                     | U |            |
|          | n |             | o |                     | B |            |
|          | s |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | I |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | B |                     |   |            |
|          | p |             | S |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          | o |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | Z |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | B |             | P |                     | K |            |
|          | o |             | r |                     | U |            |
|          | w |             | i |                     | B |            |
|          | e |             | o |                     | ( |            |
|          | l |             | r |                     | a |            |
|          | O |             | h |                     | i |            |
|          | b |             | e |                     | r |            |
|          | s |             | r |                     | f |            |
|          | t |             | n |                     | l |            |
|          | r |             | i |                     | u |            |
|          | u |             | a |                     | i |            |
|          | c |             | , |                     | d |            |
|          | t |             | a |                     | l |            |
|          | i |             | b |                     | e |            |
|          | o |             | d |                     | v |            |
|          | n |             | s |                     | e |            |
|          | / |             | u |                     | l |            |
|          | I |             | r |                     | s |            |
|          | l |             | g |                     | ) |            |
|          | e |             | e |                     | , |            |
|          | u |             | r |                     | C |            |
|          | s |             | y |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | v |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | . |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | I |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | E |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     | S |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | N |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | . |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | G |             | S |                     | U |            |
|          | I |             | e |                     | p |            |
|          | p |             | v |                     | r |            |
|          | e |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          | r |             | r |                     | g |            |
|          | f |             | e |                     | h |            |
|          | o |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          | r |             | b |                     | o |            |
|          | a |             | d |                     | r |            |
|          | t |             | o |                     | l |            |
|          | i |             | m |                     | a |            |
|          | o |             | i |                     | t |            |
|          | n |             | n |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | K |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | U |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | B |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | X |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | R |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | E |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | S |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | A |             | R |                     | C |            |
|          | c |             | a |                     | B |            |
|          | u |             | p |                     | C |            |
|          | t |             | i |                     | ( |            |
|          | e |             | d |                     | l |            |
|          | m |             | o |                     | e |            |
|          | e |             | n |                     | u |            |
|          | s |             | s |                     | k |            |
|          | e |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          | n |             | t |                     | c |            |
|          | t |             | , |                     | y |            |
|          | e |             | s |                     | t |            |
|          | r |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          | i |             | v |                     | s |            |
|          | c |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     | s |            |
|          | s |             | e |                     | ) |            |
|          | c |             | , |                     | , |            |
|          | h |             | d |                     | B |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | M |            |
|          | m |             | f |                     | P |            |
|          | i |             | f |                     | ( |            |
|          | a |             | u |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | ( |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | ) |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     | w |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | ) |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     | ( |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | ) |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ( |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ) |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | F |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | C |             | P |                     | A |            |
|          | h |             | o |                     | b |            |
|          | r |             | s |                     | d |            |
|          | o |             | t |                     | o |            |
|          | n |             | - |                     | m |            |
|          | i |             | p |                     | i |            |
|          | c |             | r |                     | n |            |
|          | m |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          | e |             | n |                     | l |            |
|          | s |             | d |                     | C |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | T |            |
|          | n |             | a |                     | A |            |
|          | t |             | l |                     | o |            |
|          | e |             | ( |                     | r |            |
|          | r |             | i |                     | m |            |
|          | i |             | n |                     | e |            |
|          | c |             | t |                     | s |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     | e |            |
|          | s |             | s |                     | n |            |
|          | c |             | t |                     | t |            |
|          | h |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          | e |             | n |                     | r |            |
|          | m |             | a |                     | i |            |
|          | i |             | l |                     | c |            |
|          | a |             | a |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | ) |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | P |             | D |                     | K |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | U |            |
|          | r |             | f |                     | B |            |
|          | i |             | f |                     | , |            |
|          | t |             | u |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | s |                     | T |            |
|          | n |             | e |                     | a |            |
|          | e |             | a |                     | b |            |
|          | a |             | b |                     | d |            |
|          | l |             | d |                     | o |            |
|          | D |             | o |                     | m |            |
|          | i |             | m |                     | e |            |
|          | a |             | i |                     | n |            |
|          | l |             | n |                     | , |            |
|          | y |             | a |                     | n |            |
|          | s |             | l |                     | e |            |
|          | i |             | p |                     | p |            |
|          | s |             | a |                     | h |            |
|          | - |             | i |                     | r |            |
|          | r |             | n |                     | o |            |
|          | e |             | a |                     | n |            |
|          | l |             | n |                     | c |            |
|          | a |             | d |                     | o |            |
|          | t |             | c |                     | n |            |
|          | e |             | l |                     | s |            |
|          | d |             | o |                     | u |            |
|          | p |             | u |                     | l |            |
|          | e |             | d |                     | t |            |
|          | r |             | y |                     | , |            |
|          | i |             | p |                     | m |            |
|          | t |             | e |                     | a |            |
|          | o |             | r |                     | y |            |
|          | n |             | i |                     | r |            |
|          | i |             | t |                     | e |            |
|          | t |             | o |                     | q |            |
|          | i |             | n |                     | u |            |
|          | s |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | E |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | S |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | C |             | D |                     | T |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | t |            |
|          | l |             | f |                     | g |            |
|          | i |             | f |                     | - |            |
|          | a |             | u |                     | I |            |
|          | c |             | s |                     | g |            |
|          | d |             | e |                     | A |            |
|          | i |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          | s |             | b |                     | t |            |
|          | e |             | d |                     | o |            |
|          | a |             | o |                     | t |            |
|          | s |             | m |                     | a |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | I |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | D |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | I |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | E |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | D |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | w |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | . |                     | s |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | C |             | C |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | r |                     | B |            |
|          | l |             | a |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | m |                     | , |            |
|          | n |             | p |                     | B |            |
|          | i |             | i |                     | M |            |
|          | c |             | n |                     | P |            |
|          | n |             | g |                     | , |            |
|          | o |             | p |                     | L |            |
|          | n |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          | - |             | i |                     | c |            |
|          | o |             | n |                     | t |            |
|          | c |             | , |                     | a |            |
|          | c |             | l |                     | t |            |
|          | l |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          | u |             | t |                     | , |            |
|          | s |             | e |                     | C |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     | T |            |
|          | v |             | a |                     | A |            |
|          | e |             | l |                     | / |            |
|          | m |             | l |                     | P |            |
|          | e |             | y |                     | w |            |
|          | s |             | ( |                     | c |            |
|          | e |             | m |                     | o |            |
|          | n |             | o |                     | n |            |
|          | t |             | s |                     | t |            |
|          | e |             | t |                     | r |            |
|          | r |             | o |                     | a |            |
|          | i |             | f |                     | s |            |
|          | c |             | t |                     | t |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     | + |            |
|          | s |             | n |                     | / |            |
|          | c |             | l |                     | - |            |
|          | h |             | e |                     | c |            |
|          | e |             | f |                     | o |            |
|          | m |             | t |                     | l |            |
|          | i |             | ) |                     | o |            |
|          | a |             | , |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | y |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | + |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | z |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | A |             | P |                     | C |            |
|          | p |             | e |                     | B |            |
|          | p |             | r |                     | C |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | , |            |
|          | n |             | u |                     | C |            |
|          | d |             | m |                     | R |            |
|          | i |             | b |                     | P |            |
|          | c |             | i |                     | , |            |
|          | i |             | l |                     | l |            |
|          | t |             | i |                     | a |            |
|          | i |             | c |                     | c |            |
|          | s |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | R |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | L |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | Q |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | ( |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | - |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | H |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | w |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | w |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | z |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ) |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | I |             | D |                     | C |            |
|          | B |             | i |                     | B |            |
|          | D |             | a |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | ( |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | E |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | S |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | R |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | R |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | ) |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | - |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | I |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | O |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | & |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | v |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | y |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | . |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | . |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     | y |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | . |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ( |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ) |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | I |             | A |                     | C |            |
|          | n |             | B |                     | - |            |
|          | f |             | x |                     | d |            |
|          | e |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          | c |             | x |                     | f |            |
|          | t |             | p |                     | f |            |
|          | i |             | o |                     | P |            |
|          | o |             | s |                     | C |            |
|          | u |             | u |                     | R |            |
|          | s |             | r |                     | , |            |
|          | c |             | e |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | , |                     | B |            |
|          | l |             | d |                     | C |            |
|          | i |             | i |                     | , |            |
|          | t |             | a |                     | K |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     | U |            |
|          | s |             | r |                     | B |            |
|          | i |             | h |                     | ( |            |
|          | n |             | e |                     | m |            |
|          | c |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          | l |             | , |                     | g |            |
|          | u |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          | d |             | b |                     | c |            |
|          | i |             | d |                     | o |            |
|          | n |             | o |                     | l |            |
|          | g |             | m |                     | o |            |
|          | C |             | i |                     | n |            |
|          | . |             | n |                     | ) |            |
|          | d |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          | f |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          | f |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          | c |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          | o |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          | l |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          | s |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | C |             | C |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | a |                     | o |            |
|          | l |             | n |                     | l |            |
|          | o |             | p |                     | o |            |
|          | r |             | r |                     | n |            |
|          | e |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          | c |             | s |                     | s |            |
|          | t |             | e |                     | c |            |
|          | a |             | n |                     | o |            |
|          | l |             | t |                     | p |            |
|          | c |             | w |                     | y |            |
|          | a |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          | c |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          | e |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          | r |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | I |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | D |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | C |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | R |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | C |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | C |             | P |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | s |                     | B |            |
|          | l |             | e |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | u |                     | , |            |
|          | n |             | d |                     | l |            |
|          | i |             | o |                     | a |            |
|          | c |             | - |                     | c |            |
|          | p |             | o |                     | t |            |
|          | s |             | b |                     | a |            |
|          | e |             | s |                     | t |            |
|          | u |             | t |                     | e |            |
|          | d |             | r |                     | , |            |
|          | o |             | u |                     | C |            |
|          | - |             | c |                     | T |            |
|          | o |             | t |                     | A |            |
|          | b |             | i |                     | / |            |
|          | s |             | o |                     | P |            |
|          | t |             | n |                     | w |            |
|          | r |             | i |                     | c |            |
|          | u |             | n |                     | o |            |
|          | c |             | e |                     | n |            |
|          | t |             | l |                     | t |            |
|          | i |             | d |                     | r |            |
|          | o |             | e |                     | a |            |
|          | n |             | r |                     | s |            |
|          | ( |             | l |                     | t |            |
|          | O |             | y |                     | , |            |
|          | g |             | p |                     | i |            |
|          | i |             | t |                     | f |            |
|          | l |             | , |                     | n |            |
|          | v |             | s |                     | o |            |
|          | i |             | i |                     | p |            |
|          | e |             | g |                     | e |            |
|          | ' |             | n |                     | r |            |
|          | s |             | s |                     | i |            |
|          | s |             | o |                     | t |            |
|          | y |             | f |                     | o |            |
|          | n |             | o |                     | n |            |
|          | d |             | b |                     | i |            |
|          | r |             | s |                     | t |            |
|          | o |             | t |                     | i |            |
|          | m |             | r |                     | s |            |
|          | e |             | u |                     | s |            |
|          | ) |             | c |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | v |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | y |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | e |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | V |             | P |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | r |                     | B |            |
|          | l |             | o |                     | C |            |
|          | v |             | g |                     | , |            |
|          | u |             | r |                     | l |            |
|          | l |             | e |                     | a |            |
|          | u |             | s |                     | c |            |
|          | s |             | s |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | K |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | U |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | B |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | w |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | T |             | N |                     | C |            |
|          | y |             | e |                     | B |            |
|          | p |             | u |                     | C |            |
|          | h |             | t |                     | w |            |
|          | l |             | r |                     | i |            |
|          | i |             | o |                     | t |            |
|          | t |             | p |                     | h |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     | d |            |
|          | s |             | n |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | w |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | ( |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | R |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | L |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | Q |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | ) |                     | x |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | - |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | ; |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | B |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | x |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | H |             | L |                     | C |            |
|          | e |             | o |                     | B |            |
|          | l |             | o |                     | C |            |
|          | m |             | s |                     | - |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     | d |            |
|          | n |             | s |                     | i |            |
|          | t |             | t |                     | f |            |
|          | h |             | o |                     | f |            |
|          | i |             | o |                     | ( |            |
|          | c |             | l |                     | e |            |
|          | i |             | s |                     | o |            |
|          | n |             | w |                     | s |            |
|          | f |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          | e |             | t |                     | n |            |
|          | c |             | h |                     | o |            |
|          | t |             | m |                     | p |            |
|          | i |             | u |                     | h |            |
|          | o |             | c |                     | i |            |
|          | n |             | u |                     | l |            |
|          | s |             | s |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | ) |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | O |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | & |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | B |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | M |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | E |             | A |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | b |                     | B |            |
|          | s |             | d |                     | C |            |
|          | i |             | o |                     | - |            |
|          | n |             | m |                     | d |            |
|          | o |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          | p |             | n |                     | f |            |
|          | h |             | a |                     | f |            |
|          | i |             | l |                     | , |            |
|          | l |             | p |                     | C |            |
|          | i |             | a |                     | M |            |
|          | c |             | i |                     | P |            |
|          | g |             | n |                     | , |            |
|          | a |             | , |                     | E |            |
|          | s |             | N |                     | G |            |
|          | t |             | / |                     | D |            |
|          | r |             | V |                     |   |            |
|          | o |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          | e |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          | e |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          | r |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          | s |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | L |             | C |                     | H |            |
|          | a |             | r |                     | y |            |
|          | c |             | a |                     | d |            |
|          | t |             | m |                     | r |            |
|          | o |             | p |                     | o |            |
|          | s |             | i |                     | g |            |
|          | e |             | n |                     | e |            |
|          | i |             | g |                     | n |            |
|          | n |             | a |                     | b |            |
|          | t |             | b |                     | r |            |
|          | o |             | d |                     | e |            |
|          | l |             | o |                     | a |            |
|          | e |             | m |                     | t |            |
|          | r |             | i |                     | h |            |
|          | a |             | n |                     | t |            |
|          | n |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          | c |             | l |                     | s |            |
|          | e |             | p |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | . |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| OB/Gyn   | E |             | R |                     | U |            |
|          | c |             | L |                     | r |            |
|          | t |             | Q |                     | i |            |
|          | o |             | o |                     | n |            |
|          | p |             | r |                     | e |            |
|          | i |             | L |                     | h |            |
|          | c |             | L |                     | C |            |
|          | p |             | Q |                     | G |            |
|          | r |             | p |                     | , |            |
|          | e |             | a |                     | p |            |
|          | g |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          | n |             | n |                     | l |            |
|          | a |             | w |                     | v |            |
|          | n |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          | c |             | t |                     | c |            |
|          | y |             | h |                     | U |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     | S |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | B |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | & |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | S |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | O |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | B |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | y |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | 6 |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | 8 |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | L |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | M |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | P |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | P |             | L |                     | B |            |
|          | e |             | a |                     | i |            |
|          | l |             | t |                     | m |            |
|          | v |             | e |                     | a |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     | n |            |
|          | c |             | a |                     | u |            |
|          | i |             | l |                     | a |            |
|          | n |             | i |                     | l |            |
|          | f |             | z |                     | p |            |
|          | l |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          | a |             | t |                     | l |            |
|          | m |             | i |                     | v |            |
|          | m |             | o |                     | i |            |
|          | a |             | n |                     | c |            |
|          | t |             | u |                     | e |            |
|          | o |             | n |                     | x |            |
|          | r |             | c |                     | a |            |
|          | y |             | o |                     | m |            |
|          | d |             | m |                     | w |            |
|          | i |             | m |                     | / |            |
|          | s |             | o |                     | G |            |
|          | e |             | n |                     | C |            |
|          | a |             | , |                     | N |            |
|          | s |             | a |                     | A |            |
|          | e |             | c |                     | A |            |
|          | / |             | u |                     | T |            |
|          | T |             | t |                     | , |            |
|          | u |             | e |                     | p |            |
|          | b |             | o |                     | e |            |
|          | o |             | n |                     | l |            |
|          | - |             | s |                     | v |            |
|          | o |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          | v |             | t |                     | c |            |
|          | a |             | l |                     | U |            |
|          | r |             | o |                     | S |            |
|          | i |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          | b |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          | s |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          | c |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          | e |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          | s |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | s |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | S |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | T |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | I |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | E |             | A |                     | T |            |
|          | n |             | s |                     | A |            |
|          | d |             | s |                     | o |            |
|          | o |             | o |                     | r |            |
|          | m |             | c |                     | T |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | V |            |
|          | t |             | a |                     | U |            |
|          | r |             | t |                     | S |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     | , |            |
|          | o |             | d |                     | O |            |
|          | s |             | w |                     | B |            |
|          | i |             | i |                     | / |            |
|          | s |             | t |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | y |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | v |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | U |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | B |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | L |             | S |                     | T |            |
|          | e |             | y |                     | A |            |
|          | i |             | m |                     | o |            |
|          | o |             | p |                     | r |            |
|          | m |             | t |                     | T |            |
|          | y |             | o |                     | V |            |
|          | o |             | m |                     | U |            |
|          | m |             | s |                     | S |            |
|          | a |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          | s |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          | ( |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          | f |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          | b |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          | r |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          | o |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          | d |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          | s |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          | ) |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | q |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | R |             | S |                     | C |            |
|          | u |             | u |                     | B |            |
|          | p |             | d |                     | C |            |
|          | t |             | d |                     | , |            |
|          | u |             | e |                     | T |            |
|          | r |             | n |                     | & |            |
|          | e |             | - |                     | S |            |
|          | d |             | o |                     | , |            |
|          | o |             | n |                     | T |            |
|          | v |             | s |                     | A |            |
|          | a |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          | r |             | t |                     | r |            |
|          | i |             | s |                     | T |            |
|          | a |             | e |                     | V |            |
|          | n |             | v |                     | U |            |
|          | c |             | e |                     | S |            |
|          | y |             | r |                     | , |            |
|          | s |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          | t |             | f |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | v |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | H |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | D |            |
|          |   |             | q |                     | S |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | O |             | A |                     | P |            |
|          | v |             | c |                     | e |            |
|          | a |             | u |                     | l |            |
|          | r |             | t |                     | v |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          | a |             | - |                     | c |            |
|          | n |             | o |                     | U |            |
|          | t |             | n |                     | S |            |
|          | o |             | s |                     | w |            |
|          | r |             | e |                     | / |            |
|          | s |             | t |                     | d |            |
|          | i |             | m |                     | o |            |
|          | o |             | o |                     | p |            |
|          | n |             | d |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | O |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | B |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | y |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | z |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | . |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | O |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | O |             | A |                     | S |            |
|          | v |             | b |                     | u |            |
|          | a |             | d |                     | p |            |
|          | r |             | o |                     | p |            |
|          | i |             | m |                     | o |            |
|          | a |             | i |                     | r |            |
|          | n |             | n |                     | t |            |
|          | h |             | a |                     | i |            |
|          | y |             | l |                     | v |            |
|          | p |             | d |                     | e |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | r |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          | s |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          | m |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          | u |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          | l |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          | o |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | O |             | A |                     | P |            |
|          | v |             | b |                     | e |            |
|          | a |             | d |                     | l |            |
|          | r |             | o |                     | v |            |
|          | i |             | m |                     | i |            |
|          | a |             | i |                     | c |            |
|          | n |             | n |                     | U |            |
|          | c |             | a |                     | S |            |
|          | a |             | l |                     | , |            |
|          | n |             | o |                     | C |            |
|          | c |             | r |                     | T |            |
|          | e |             | p |                     | A |            |
|          | r |             | e |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | q |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | q |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | . |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | O |             | M |                     | S |            |
|          | v |             | i |                     | u |            |
|          | u |             | d |                     | p |            |
|          | l |             | - |                     | p |            |
|          | a |             | c |                     | o |            |
|          | t |             | y |                     | r |            |
|          | o |             | c |                     | t |            |
|          | r |             | l |                     | i |            |
|          | y |             | e |                     | v |            |
|          | p |             | r |                     | e |            |
|          | a |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          | ( |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          | M |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          | e |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          | l |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          | s |             | - |                     |   |            |
|          | m |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | r |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          | z |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          | ) |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | . |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| Kidney   | N |             | U |                     | U |            |
|          | e |             | s |                     | / |            |
|          | p |             | u |                     | A |            |
|          | h |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          | r |             | l |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | l |                     | T |            |
|          | l |             | y |                     | A |            |
|          | i |             | s |                     | / |            |
|          | t |             | h |                     | P |            |
|          | h |             | a |                     | w |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     | / |            |
|          | a |             | p |                     | o |            |
|          | s |             | f |                     | c |            |
|          | i |             | l |                     | o |            |
|          | s |             | a |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ± |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | C |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ' |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | P |             | U |                     | U |            |
|          | y |             | s |                     | / |            |
|          | e |             | u |                     | A |            |
|          | l |             | a |                     | w |            |
|          | o |             | l |                     | i |            |
|          | n |             | l |                     | t |            |
|          | e |             | y |                     | h |            |
|          | p |             | , |                     | c |            |
|          | h |             | f |                     | u |            |
|          | r |             | l |                     | l |            |
|          | i |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          | t |             | n |                     | u |            |
|          | i |             | k |                     | r |            |
|          | s |             | p |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | B |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | M |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | w |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | w |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | C |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | q |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | . |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | C |             | S |                     | U |            |
|          | y |             | u |                     | / |            |
|          | s |             | p |                     | A |            |
|          | t |             | r |                     | w |            |
|          | i |             | a |                     | i |            |
|          | t |             | p |                     | t |            |
|          | i |             | u |                     | h |            |
|          | s |             | b |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | x |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | q |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | U |             | S |                     | P |            |
|          | r |             | u |                     | o |            |
|          | i |             | p |                     | s |            |
|          | n |             | r |                     | t |            |
|          | a |             | a |                     | - |            |
|          | r |             | p |                     | v |            |
|          | y |             | u |                     | o |            |
|          | R |             | b |                     | i |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | d |            |
|          | t |             | c |                     | r |            |
|          | e |             | p |                     | e |            |
|          | n |             | a |                     | s |            |
|          | t |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          | i |             | n |                     | d |            |
|          | o |             | w |                     | u |            |
|          | n |             | i |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | B |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | P |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | H |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | R |             | A |                     | C |            |
|          | e |             | c |                     | B |            |
|          | n |             | u |                     | C |            |
|          | a |             | t |                     | , |            |
|          | l |             | e |                     | B |            |
|          | i |             | f |                     | M |            |
|          | n |             | l |                     | P |            |
|          | f |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          | a |             | n |                     | U |            |
|          | r |             | k |                     | A |            |
|          | c |             | p |                     | , |            |
|          | t |             | a |                     | E |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | G |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | ( |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     | ) |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | + |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | w |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | H |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | T |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| Vascular | M |             | C |                     | E |            |
|          | y |             | A |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | D |                     | G |            |
|          | c |             | r |                     | , |            |
|          | a |             | i |                     | t |            |
|          | r |             | s |                     | r |            |
|          | d |             | k |                     | o |            |
|          | i |             | f |                     | p |            |
|          | a |             | a |                     | o |            |
|          | l |             | c |                     | n |            |
|          | i |             | t |                     | i |            |
|          | n |             | o |                     | n |            |
|          | f |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          | r |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          | c |             | D |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | E |                     |   |            |
|          | o |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | A |             | V |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | a |                     | T |            |
|          | r |             | s |                     | d |            |
|          | t |             | c |                     | i |            |
|          | i |             | u |                     | s |            |
|          | c |             | l |                     | s |            |
|          | D |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     | c |            |
|          | s |             | R |                     | t |            |
|          | s |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          | e |             | s |                     | o |            |
|          | c |             | k |                     | n |            |
|          | t |             | f |                     | r |            |
|          | i |             | a |                     | u |            |
|          | o |             | c |                     | l |            |
|          | n |             | t |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | à |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | A |             | V |                     | C |            |
|          | A |             | a |                     | T |            |
|          | A |             | s |                     | A |            |
|          | r |             | c |                     | / |            |
|          | u |             | u |                     | P |            |
|          | p |             | l |                     | w |            |
|          | t |             | a |                     | c |            |
|          | u |             | r |                     | o |            |
|          | r |             | r |                     | n |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | v |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | à |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | y |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | A |             | C |                     | I |            |
|          | b |             | r |                     | n |            |
|          | d |             | i |                     | t |            |
|          | o |             | t |                     | r |            |
|          | m |             | i |                     | a |            |
|          | i |             | c |                     | - |            |
|          | n |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          | a |             | l |                     | b |            |
|          | l |             | l |                     | d |            |
|          | c |             | y |                     | o |            |
|          | o |             | i |                     | m |            |
|          | m |             | l |                     | i |            |
|          | p |             | l |                     | n |            |
|          | a |             | p |                     | a |            |
|          | r |             | a |                     | l |            |
|          | t |             | t |                     | p |            |
|          | m |             | i |                     | r |            |
|          | e |             | e |                     | e |            |
|          | n |             | n |                     | s |            |
|          | t |             | t |                     | s |            |
|          | s |             | s |                     | u |            |
|          | y |             | ; |                     | r |            |
|          | n |             | b |                     | e |            |
|          | d |             | u |                     | m |            |
|          | r |             | r |                     | e |            |
|          | o |             | n |                     | a |            |
|          | m |             | , |                     | s |            |
|          | e |             | t |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | ( |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | v |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | I |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | V |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | ) |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | . |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| MSK/skin | H |             | I |                     | P |            |
|          | e |             | m |                     | h |            |
|          | r |             | m |                     | y |            |
|          | p |             | u |                     | s |            |
|          | e |             | n |                     | i |            |
|          | s |             | o |                     | c |            |
|          | z |             | c |                     | a |            |
|          | o |             | o |                     | l |            |
|          | s |             | m |                     | e |            |
|          | t |             | p |                     | x |            |
|          | e |             | r |                     | a |            |
|          | r |             | o |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | v |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | R |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | f |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | z |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | M |             | W |                     | P |            |
|          | u |             | o |                     | h |            |
|          | s |             | r |                     | y |            |
|          | c |             | s |                     | s |            |
|          | l |             | e |                     | i |            |
|          | e |             | w |                     | c |            |
|          | s |             | i |                     | a |            |
|          | t |             | t |                     | l |            |
|          | r |             | h |                     | e |            |
|          | a |             | t |                     | x |            |
|          | i |             | w |                     | a |            |
|          | n |             | i |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | ; |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | N |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | S |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | I |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | D |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | H |             | B |                     | C |            |
|          | e |             | u |                     | T |            |
|          | r |             | l |                     | A |            |
|          | n |             | g |                     | / |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     | P |            |
|          | a |             | , |                     | w |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| P        | P |             | P |                     | C |            |
| ulmonary | n |             | r |                     | X |            |
|          | e |             | o |                     | R |            |
|          | u |             | d |                     | , |            |
|          | m |             | u |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | c |                     | B |            |
|          | n |             | t |                     | C |            |
|          | i |             | i |                     | , |            |
|          | a |             | v |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | x |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | P |             | T |                     | E |            |
|          | u |             | a |                     | C |            |
|          | l |             | c |                     | G |            |
|          | m |             | h |                     | , |            |
|          | o |             | y |                     | t |            |
|          | n |             | c |                     | r |            |
|          | a |             | a |                     | o |            |
|          | r |             | r |                     | p |            |
|          | y |             | d |                     | , |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | B |            |
|          | m |             | a |                     | N |            |
|          | b |             | , |                     | P |            |
|          | o |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          | l |             | a |                     | C |            |
|          | u |             | c |                     | T |            |
|          | s |             | h |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| Hem      | P |             | F |                     | U |            |
| atologic | a |             | a |                     | A |            |
|          | r |             | t |                     | w |            |
|          | o |             | i |                     | / |            |
|          | x |             | g |                     | m |            |
|          | y |             | u |                     | i |            |
|          | s |             | e |                     | c |            |
|          | m |             | , |                     | r |            |
|          | a |             | d |                     | o |            |
|          | l |             | y |                     | s |            |
|          | n |             | s |                     | c |            |
|          | o |             | p |                     | o |            |
|          | c |             | n |                     | p |            |
|          | t |             | e |                     | y |            |
|          | u |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          | r |             | , |                     | C |            |
|          | n |             | h |                     | B |            |
|          | a |             | e |                     | C |            |
|          | l |             | m |                     | , |            |
|          | h |             | o |                     | s |            |
|          | e |             | g |                     | m |            |
|          | m |             | l |                     | e |            |
|          | o |             | o |                     | a |            |
|          | g |             | b |                     | r |            |
|          | l |             | i |                     | , |            |
|          | o |             | n |                     | r |            |
|          | b |             | u |                     | e |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     | t |            |
|          | n |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          | u |             | a |                     | c |            |
|          | r |             | , |                     | c |            |
|          | i |             | c |                     | o |            |
|          | a |             | y |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | D |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | M |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | L |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | D |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | H |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | o |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | T |             | N |                     | U |            |
|          | T |             | o |                     | A |            |
|          | P |             | n |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | B |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | D |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | D |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | M |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | L |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | D |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | H |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | ; |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | D |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | M |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | S |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | 1 |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | 3 |            |
|          |   |             | j |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | M |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | H |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | A |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | A |             | S |                     | U |            |
|          | c |             | e |                     | r |            |
|          | u |             | v |                     | i |            |
|          | t |             | e |                     | n |            |
|          | e |             | r |                     | a |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     | r |            |
|          | n |             | , |                     | y |            |
|          | t |             | p |                     | P |            |
|          | e |             | o |                     | B |            |
|          | r |             | o |                     | G |            |
|          | m |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          | e |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          | p |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | o |             | z |                     |   |            |
|          | r |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          | p |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          | h |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          | y |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | r |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | L |             | \ |                     | E |            |
|          | e |             | " |                     | x |            |
|          | a |             | L |                     | p |            |
|          | d |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          | p |             | a |                     | s |            |
|          | o |             | d |                     | u |            |
|          | i |             | c |                     | r |            |
|          | s |             | o |                     | e |            |
|          | o |             | l |                     | h |            |
|          | n |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          | i |             | c |                     | s |            |
|          | n |             | " |                     | t |            |
|          | g |             | , |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | y |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | ( |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | w |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | g |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     | n |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | ) |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | x |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     | v |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| E        | A |             | H |                     | B |            |
| ndocrine | d |             | y |                     | M |            |
|          | r |             | p |                     | P |            |
|          | e |             | o |                     | ( |            |
|          | n |             | t |                     | ↓ |            |
|          | a |             | e |                     | N |            |
|          | l |             | n |                     | a |            |
|          | i |             | s |                     | , |            |
|          | n |             | i |                     | ↑ |            |
|          | s |             | o |                     | K |            |
|          | u |             | n |                     | , |            |
|          | f |             | , |                     | ↓ |            |
|          | f |             | f |                     | G |            |
|          | i |             | a |                     | l |            |
|          | c |             | t |                     | u |            |
|          | i |             | i |                     | ) |            |
|          | e |             | g |                     | , |            |
|          | n |             | u |                     | C |            |
|          | c |             | e |                     | o |            |
|          | y |             | , |                     | r |            |
|          | / |             | l |                     | t |            |
|          | c |             | e |                     | . |            |
|          | r |             | t |                     | s |            |
|          | i |             | h |                     | t |            |
|          | s |             | a |                     | i |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     | m |            |
|          | s |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | D |             | D |                     | C |            |
|          | K |             | i |                     | B |            |
|          | A |             | f |                     | C |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | B |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | M |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     | U |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     | / |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | A |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | e |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     | - |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | - |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | h |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | y |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | d |            |
|          |   |             | N |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     | o |            |
|          |   |             | V |                     | x |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     | y |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | b |            |
|          |   |             | / |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | D |                     | y |            |
|          |   |             | M |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             |   |                     | e |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | H |             | A |                     | T |            |
|          | y |             | c |                     | S |            |
|          | p |             | c |                     | H |            |
|          | o |             | o |                     | , |            |
|          | t |             | m |                     | f |            |
|          | h |             | p |                     | T |            |
|          | y |             | a |                     | 4 |            |
|          | r |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          | o |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          | d |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          | s |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | m |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| Fu       | I |             | I |                     | D |            |
| nctional | B |             | m |                     | i |            |
|          | S |             | a |                     | a |            |
|          | , |             | g |                     | g |            |
|          | d |             | i |                     | n |            |
|          | e |             | n |                     | o |            |
|          | p |             | g |                     | s |            |
|          | r |             | a |                     | i |            |
|          | e |             | n |                     | s |            |
|          | s |             | d |                     | o |            |
|          | s |             | o |                     | f |            |
|          | i |             | t |                     | e |            |
|          | o |             | h |                     | x |            |
|          | n |             | e |                     | c |            |
|          | , |             | r |                     | l |            |
|          | s |             | w |                     | u |            |
|          | o |             | o |                     | s |            |
|          | m |             | r |                     | i |            |
|          | a |             | k |                     | o |            |
|          | t |             | u |                     | n |            |
|          | i |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          | z |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          | o |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | , |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          | f |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          | u |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | c |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | o |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | l |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | d |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | y |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | s |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | p |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | e |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | p |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | s |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | , |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | x |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | e |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | y |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | b |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | d |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | o |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | m |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | l |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | m |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | g |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | r |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | i |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | n |             |   |                     |   |            |
|          | e |             |   |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
| Other    | I |             | P |                     | C |            |
|          | n |             | r |                     | B |            |
|          | t |             | i |                     | C |            |
|          | r |             | o |                     | , |            |
|          | a |             | r |                     | B |            |
|          | - |             | i |                     | C |            |
|          | a |             | n |                     | x |            |
|          | b |             | t |                     | , |            |
|          | d |             | r |                     | C |            |
|          | o |             | a |                     | T |            |
|          | m |             | - |                     | A |            |
|          | i |             | a |                     | / |            |
|          | n |             | b |                     | P |            |
|          | a |             | d |                     | w |            |
|          | l |             | o |                     | / |            |
|          | a |             | m |                     | c |            |
|          | b |             | i |                     | o |            |
|          | s |             | n |                     | n |            |
|          | c |             | a |                     | t |            |
|          | e |             | l |                     | r |            |
|          | s |             | d |                     | a |            |
|          | s |             | i |                     | s |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | H |             | N |                     | B |            |
|          | y |             | / |                     | M |            |
|          | p |             | V |                     | P |            |
|          | e |             | , |                     | , |            |
|          | r |             | c |                     | i |            |
|          | c |             | o |                     | o |            |
|          | a |             | n |                     | n |            |
|          | l |             | s |                     | i |            |
|          | c |             | t |                     | z |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          | m |             | p |                     | d |            |
|          | i |             | a |                     | c |            |
|          | a |             | t |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     | c |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | u |            |
|          |   |             | ↑ |                     | m |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | H |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | V |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | ↑ |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     | D |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     | , |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | P |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | T |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     | H |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | p |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | A |             | P |                     | C |            |
|          | n |             | a |                     | 4 |            |
|          | g |             | r |                     | , |            |
|          | i |             | o |                     | c |            |
|          | o |             | x |                     | 1 |            |
|          | e |             | y |                     | - |            |
|          | d |             | s |                     | I |            |
|          | e |             | m |                     | N |            |
|          | m |             | a |                     | H |            |
|          | a |             | l |                     | , |            |
|          | ( |             | G |                     | c |            |
|          | h |             | I |                     | 1 |            |
|          | e |             | c |                     | q |            |
|          | r |             | o |                     | , |            |
|          | e |             | l |                     | d |            |
|          | d |             | i |                     | i |            |
|          | i |             | c |                     | s |            |
|          | t |             | w |                     | c |            |
|          | a |             | i |                     | o |            |
|          | r |             | t |                     | n |            |
|          | y |             | h |                     | t |            |
|          | o |             | N |                     | i |            |
|          | r |             | / |                     | n |            |
|          | A |             | V |                     | u |            |
|          | C |             | / |                     | e |            |
|          | E |             | D |                     | A |            |
|          | i |             | a |                     | C |            |
|          | - |             | l |                     | E |            |
|          | r |             | o |                     | i |            |
|          | e |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          | l |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          | a |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          | t |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          | e |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          | d |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          | ) |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+
|          | F |             | R |                     | G |            |
|          | a |             | e |                     | e |            |
|          | m |             | c |                     | n |            |
|          | i |             | u |                     | e |            |
|          | l |             | r |                     | t |            |
|          | i |             | r |                     | i |            |
|          | a |             | e |                     | c |            |
|          | l |             | n |                     | t |            |
|          | M |             | t |                     | e |            |
|          | e |             | a |                     | s |            |
|          | d |             | c |                     | t |            |
|          | i |             | u |                     | i |            |
|          | t |             | t |                     | n |            |
|          | e |             | e |                     | g |            |
|          | r |             | a |                     | , |            |
|          | r |             | b |                     | c |            |
|          | a |             | d |                     | o |            |
|          | n |             | o |                     | l |            |
|          | e |             | m |                     | c |            |
|          | a |             | e |                     | h |            |
|          | n |             | n |                     | i |            |
|          | f |             | w |                     | c |            |
|          | e |             | / |                     | i |            |
|          | v |             | o |                     | n |            |
|          | e |             | i |                     | e |            |
|          | r |             | d |                     | t |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     | r |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     | i |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     | a |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     | l |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | b |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | c |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ( |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ) |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | f |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | n |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | o |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | u |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | , |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | p |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | - |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | k |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | y |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | m |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ; |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | 1 |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ^ |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | s |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | ^ |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | d |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | g |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | r |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | l |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | a |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | v |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | e |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | w |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | i |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | t |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | h |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | F |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | M |                     |   |            |
|          |   |             | F |                     |   |            |
+----------+---+-------------+---+---------------------+---+------------+

Acute Diverticulitis -- Michael Koenig

Background

-   Inflammation and/or infection of a diverticulum, a small
    out-pouching along wall of colon

-   Presence of colonic flora on urine culture or pneumaturia suggests
    colo-vesical fistula

-   Most pts with uncomplicated diverticulitis have significant
    improvement 2-3 days after antibiotics

Presentation

-   Lower abdominal pain (85% LLQ), tenderness to palpation on exam,
    N/V, low-grade fever, change in bowel habits (constipation or
    diarrhea)

Evaluation

-   CBC w/diff, CMP, Lipase, U/A, β - hCG

-   Imaging: CT abdomen/pelvis with oral and IV contrast

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CT findings: localized bowel wall thickening (\>4mm), paracolic fat
    stranding, presence of colonic diverticula

Management

-   Bowel rest vs. clear liquids (advance diet as tolerated)

-   PO or IV antibiotics: should cover GNRs and anaerobic organisms

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Zosyn, cefepime + metronidazole, or meropenem (if high risk for
    organisms w/ESBL)

-   Cipro/flagyl if PO

-   If low risk and mild disease, may not need antibiotics

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Continue IV abx until abdominal pain/tenderness is resolved (usually
    3-5 days), then transition to oral: cipro + metronidazole or
    Augmentin to complete 10-14 d course

-   Criteria for discharge:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Resolution of vital sign abnormalities (fever, tachycardia,
    hypotension)

-   Resolution of severe abdominal pain

-   Improvement of leukocytosis

-   Able to tolerate oral diet

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Colonoscopy after complete resolution of symptoms (6 -- 8 weeks) to
    definitively rule out presence of underlying colorectal cancer
    (unless performed in last year)

Complications

-   Pts who fail to improve or deteriorate require repeat imaging

-   Abscess -\> continue antibiotics & Percutaneous drainage (if
    possible) for abscesses \> 4 cm

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Surgery if no improvement 2-3 days after drainage

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Obstruction: radiographic differentiation between acute
    diverticulitis and colon cancer is difficult; thus surgical
    resection of bowel is needed to relieve obstruction and rule out
    cancer

-   Fistula: Rarely heal spontaneously, require surgical correction

-   Perforation:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Microperforation (contained perforation):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presence of small amount of air bubbles, but no oral contrast
    outside of colon on CT

-   Most treated with IV abx and bowel rest like uncomplicated
    diverticulitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Frank perforation:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Intraabdominal free air, diffuse peritonitis -\> requires emergency
    surgery

Acute Pancreatitis -- Kristijan Bogdanovski

Background

-   Common causes: Gallstones (40%), EtOH (30%)

-   Other causes: post-ERCP, pancreatic cancer/obstruction, blunt
    abdominal trauma, hypertriglyceridemia (TG \>1000), hypercalcemia,
    drugs (thiazides, protease inhibitors, azathioprine, 6MP), mumps,
    Coxsackie, vasculitis, pregnancy, genetic (PRSS1, SPINK1, CFTR),
    autoimmune (IgG4), scorpion venom

-   Several scoring systems (all available on MDCalc)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   BISAP (Evaluate in first 24hours of presentation)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Score 3 -5: mortality \> 15 %

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   APACHE II (Evaluate in first 24hours of ICU admission)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Score\> 8: mortality 11 -- 18 %

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ranson (Evaluate at admission + 48hrs post admission)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Score \> 3: mortality \> 15% (consider ICU admission)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Glasgow-Imrie (modified Ranson criteria, used 48h post admission)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Score \>2 associated with higher mortality (consider ICU admission)

Presentation

-   Must have 2 out of the following 3 criteria:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pain characteristic of pancreatitis (sharp, epigastric, radiating to
    back)

-   Enzymes (lipase or amylase) \>3x ULN (ULN at VUMC = 78)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \*\*\*Use lipase, much more specific than amylase

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Imaging characteristic of pancreatitis (US, CT, MRI)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If pain is characteristic and lipase \> 3xULN, no need for CT A/P
    (imaging only really useful if either of the 2 criteria above are
    equivocal)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Grading Severity:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mild: no organ failure or systemic complications

-   Moderate: transient organ failure (\<48 hours)

-   Severe: persistent organ failure (\>48 hours)

Evaluation

-   Lipase, CBC, CMP, lipid panel, lactate, direct bilirubin

-   Obtain RUQ U/S for all pts, evaluates for gallstones

-   CT A/P w/ IV contrast if indicated

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Reserved for patients not improving at 48-72 hour to assess for
    complications

-   If performed at onset, underestimates severity (necrosis takes 72
    hours from onset)

Management

-   Fluids, Fluids, Fluids:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bolus 10 mg/kg (if clinically hypovolemic) + 1.5mL/kg/hr Maintenance
    Fluids

-   Follow HCT and BUN as markers for successful fluid resuscitation

-   Persistent hemoconcentration at 24 hr is associated with necrotizing
    pancreatitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pain Control:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Common starting narcotic regimen is oxycodone 10 mg q6h PRN and
    hydromorphone 0.5 mg q4h for breakthrough

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Nutrition:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Do NOT have to make NPO at presentation, restarting enteral feeding
    as early as tolerated is recommended; addressing fluid resuscitation
    and pain control will help improve appetite and PO tolerance

-   Start with clear liquid diet or mechanical soft and advance as
    tolerated

-   Low fat diet (Fatty acids → CCK → trypsinogen to trypsin)

-   If NPO \> 72 hours, attempt PO and if fail, place Dobhoff for
    enteral nutrition at latest by day 5... outcomes with NG/NJ \>\>\>
    TPN

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Antibiotics:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fever, leukocytosis common, not an indication for ABX as the
    necrosis is (often) sterile

-   Infection of the necrosis should be suspected with failure to
    improve 7 days after onset

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CT A/P w/ IV contrast recommended to assess for pancreatic or
    extra-pancreatic necrosis or local complications

-   Most likely organisms enteric (E. Coli, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas,
    Enterococcus)

-   If clinical signs of infection and abdominal imaging demonstrating
    gas within necrosis, can empirically start ABX without aspirate or
    culture

-   Use abx with good pancreatic necrotic penetration: Cefepime/FQ +
    Flagyl or carbapenem

-   EUS or IR guided drain for aspirate: can be done on immature
    collections for diagnostic purposes but typically only done if
    collection is walled-off---at least 4 weeks

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Endoscopic Intervention (cystogastrostomy) has emerged as first-line
    therapy for symptomatic pseudocysts or walled-off pancreatic
    necrosis , with step-up therapy to video assisted retroperitoneal
    debridement (VARD) or surgery when needed

Additional Information

-   Urgent ERCP for choledocholithiasis on imaging, with cholangitis or
    obstructive jaundice, otherwise elective ERCP (see page on
    choledocholithiasis)

-   Complications:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ARDS, abdominal compartment syndrome, AKI, DIC

-   \< 4 weeks after pancreatitis: Peripancreatic fluid collection,
    acute necrotic collection

-   \> 6 weeks after pancreatitis: pancreatic pseudocyst, walled-off
    necrosis (WON)

-   Most fluid collections should be followed over time as acute
    collections can resolve and are unable to be sampled safely with EUS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gallstone pancreatitis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   All pts should have cholecystectomy once recovered (recurrence is
    25-30%) with EGS

-   Performed during initial admission in cases of mild acute
    pancreatitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider age or co-morbid illness precludes fitness for surgery

Chronic Pancreatitis -- AJ De Witte

Definition

-   A syndrome characterized by irreversible chronic progressive
    pancreatic inflammation, fibrosis, and scarring, resulting in damage
    to and loss of exocrine (acinar), endocrine (islet cells), and
    ductal cells.

    Etiology: TIGAR-O mnemonic

-   [T]{.underline}oxic Metabolic: EtOH, tobacco use, hyperCa (Ca \>
    12), HLD (fasting TG \> 300, nonfasting \> 500), CKD 5, medications,
    toxins

-   [I]{.underline}diopathic: early onset (age \< 35), late onset (age
    \> 35)

-   [G]{.underline}enetic: Autosomal dominant (PRSS1 gene), recessive
    (CFTR, SPINK1, etc.)

-   [A]{.underline}utoimmune: IgG4-related (AIP type 1), AIP type 2

-   [R]{.underline}ecurrent, severe acute pancreatitis

-   [O]{.underline}bstructive: pancreas divisum, ampullary stenosis,
    main duct pancreatic stones or strictures, widespread
    calcifications, mass causing duct obstruction

    Presentation

-   Abdominal pain (most common)

-   Exocrine insufficiency: diarrhea, steatorrhea, weight loss

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Typically occurs later in disease process

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Endocrine insufficiency: diabetes

-   Occasionally asymptomatic

    Evaluation

-   Imaging: CT or MRI (may be negative early in course of disease)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If CT or MRI negative but suspicion for CP remains high, consider
    EUS +/- biopsy or secretin-enhanced MRCP

    Labs:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   BMP, LFTs, lipid panel, PeTH

-   Consider genetic testing, especially in younger patients and/or
    patients without clear etiology

-   Pancreatic function testing diagnoses exocrine insufficiency but is
    not necessary for diagnosis of CP

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gold standard = 72 hour fecal fat (\> 7g of fat per 100g stool per
    day) - rarely done

-   More practical = fecal elastase (\<100 = diagnostic, 100-200 =
    indeterminate)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Must be performed on formed stool, can be false positive If watery
    specimen

-   Do not have to stop pancreatic enzymes to measure

    -   Lipase and amylase levels can be elevated, but are usually
        normal due to pancreatic scarring and fibrosis

        Management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tobacco and EtOH cessation

-   Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy if evidence/diagnosis of
    exocrine insufficiency

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Usual dose: 50,000 units/meal + 25,000 units with snacks

-   Should take with first bite of a meal and consider adding extra
    enzymes or splitting up dose throughout meal if lasting longer than
    15 mins

    -   If lack of response: try increasing dose, confirm compliance,
        add PPI, split up dose throughout meal, look for concurrent GI
        disorders

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pain: Tylenol + NSAIDs \> Opioids (Tramadol), consider SSRI/SNRI/TCA
    or gabapentin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For refractory pain, other options include celiac plexus blockade or
    total pancreatectomy with islet auto transplant

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Vitamin supplementation + Vit D + Ca

-   Consider antioxidants (selenium, ascorbic acid, β-carotene, and
    methionine, vitamin E) -- mixed evidence but some studies have shown
    improved pain control

-   Routine testing for osteoporosis and fat-soluble vitamin
    deficiencies

Anorectal Disease -- Ashley Cozart

Background

-   Benign and malignant causes share symptoms, often hemorrhoidal
    complaints.

Presentation

-   Perianal pain

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Generalized: pruritis ani, less likely to be malignant

-   Localized: skin trauma, perianal abscess, perianal neoplasms,
    external hemorrhoids

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Anal canal pain: anal fissure, anal cancer, anal ulceration (STIs),
    proctalgia fugax

-   Bleeding: anal fissures, internal hemorrhoids, anal cancer

-   Prolapsing tissue: prolapsing internal hemorrhoids, rectal prolapse

-   Pruritis: most likely idiopathic, inflammatory skin disorders
    (dermatitis, hidradenitis suppurativa, SCC), infections (STIs and
    Candida), systemic diseases (usually generalized; DM, cholestasis,
    thyrotoxicosis, HIV, etc.)

-   Perianal drainage: anal fistula, fecal incontinence, or other skin
    conditions (i.e. pilonidal cyst)

Evaluation

-   Visual inspection+ DRE + anoscopy/proctoscopy/colonoscopy

-   Anoscopy: eval of anal condylomata, neoplasms, internal hemorrhoids,
    anal fissures

-   Rigid proctoscopy: eval of rectal neoplasms, proctitis

-   Colonoscopy: eval of anal bleeding

Management

-   Internal hemorrhoids:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Low grade (I or II):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dietary: water intake + fiber supplements +/- stool softeners

-   Lifestyle modifications: limiting seated and toilet time

-   Rx: topical anesthetics + steroids (intermittent short-term use),
    vasoactive agents (Prep H, Nitro), antispasmodic agents (ie.
    Nifedipine), sitz baths.

-   Refer to GI clinic or colorectal surgery clinic if refractory to 6-8
    weeks of medical treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High grade (III or IV): refer to colorectal surgeon

-   If bleeding refractory to conservative management, refer for banding
    (colorectal surgery vs GI)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   External hemorrhoids:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Thrombosed external hemorrhoids:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \<72 hours- bedside incision and thrombectomy

-   \>72 hours- operative intervention avoided since discomfort will
    likely improve.

-   If nonviable skin on exam- urgent surgical intervention

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If not thrombosed, can treat like low grade internal hemorrhoids as
    stated above

-   If rectal bleeding associated with any type of hemorrhoid, refer for
    colonoscopy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Perianal abscess: consult surgery for urgent incision and drainage

-   Anal fistula: surgery

-   Anal fissure: treat w/ 1 mo of supportive measures (fiber, sitz
    bath, topical analgesic), topical vasodilator (nifedipine or
    nitroglycerin), and resolution of constipation. Surgery if
    refractory.

-   Anal cancer: treatment based on tumor location/histology

-   Rectal prolapse: Likely surgical repair (indications include
    sensation of rectal prolapse and fecal incontinence and associated
    constipation. Pelvic floor exercises (VUMC Pelvic Floor Therapy
    Clinic) if patients cannot undergo procedure.

-   Proctalgia fugax: reassurance for mild-intermittent, topical
    nitroglycerin if severe-frequent

Biliary Disease -- Alex Wiles

Pearls:

-   ERCP is not available at VA: requires fee-basis consult to VUMC,
    contact GI to arrange

-   Prior cholecystectomy -\> CBD normally dilates to 10 mm, not
    pathologic

-   Pneuomobilia generally indicates performance of prior biliary
    sphincterotomy and/or biliary stent

-   CBD dilation classically \> 6mm, but CBD dilates with age: 70 yo -\>
    7mm, 80 yo -\> 8mm; opiates can also cause biliary dilatation

Acute Acalculous Cholecystitis

-   Inflammation of the GB without obstructing stone (due to stasis and
    ischemia)

-   Presentation: Seen in critically ill/ICU pts; similar history as
    above; may present as unexplained fever or RUQ mass (rarely
    jaundice)

-   Ddx: calculous cholecystitis, pancreatitis, hepatic abscess

-   Evaluation: Same as acute calculous cholecystitis

-   Imaging: GB wall thickening, pericholecystic edema, intramural gas,
    GB distention

Management: Supportive care, antibiotics, GB drainage

-   IVF, correct electrolyte abnormalities, NPO

-   Broad spectrum antibiotic coverage

-   Place CT-guided procedure consult for cholecystostomy placement vs
    Endoscopic drainage (transpapillary cystic duct stent via ERCP or
    cholecystoduodenostomy by EUS)

-   Consult EGS if necrosis, perforation, or emphysematous changes
    present

Acute Calculous Cholecystitis

-   Inflammation of the GB from an obstructing stone in the GB neck or
    cystic duct

-   Ddx: PUD, pancreatitis, choledocholithiasis, ascending cholangitis,
    IBD, Fitz-Hugh Curtis

-   Presentation: Severe constant RUQ pain, fever/chills, N/V, + Murphy
    sign

-   Evaluation: CBC (leukocytosis), CMP (mild AST/ALT ↑), Lipase,
    Lactate, BCx x2

-   Imaging: RUQ U/S: gallstones + GB wall thickening or pericholecystic
    edema

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If U/S non-diagnostic (no stones or GB inflammation) 🡪 HIDA Scan
    (lack of GB filling)

Management: NPO, IVF, IV Abx until resolved or surgical removal

-   Urgent Cholecystectomy (\<72H) with EGS;

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If poor surgical candidate: Cholecystostomy with IR; endoscopic
    drainage options for selected patients (i.e. poor surgical
    candidates also with ascites)

-   Complications: gangrenous cholecystitis, perforation, emphysematous
    cholecystitis, chole-cysto-enteric fistula, gallstone ileus

Biliary Colic

-   Transient biliary obstruction typically at the GB neck without GB
    inflammation (no fever)

-   Presentation: Constant (not colicky) intense, dull RUQ pain and N/V
    for 30 minutes to 6 hours, then resolves, provoked by fatty foods
    (CCK), absent Murphy's sign

-   Biliary colic generally consists of discrete episodes separated by
    weeks to months, and not daily pain

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Evaluation: Normal (CBC, LFTs, Lipase, Lactate)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Imaging: RUQ U/S: cholelithiasis (stones in GB)

-   Management: Elective cholecystectomy as outpatient

Choledocholithiasis -- Anton de Witte

-   Obstruction of biliary outflow by CBD stone without inflammation (no
    fever)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Impacted cystic duct stone (cholecystitis) with compression of the
    CBD (Mirizzi syndrome)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presentation: RUQ pain (can be painless), N/V and jaundice

-   Evaluation: CMP and D-bili (Bili/ALP/ GGT ↑↑↑, AST/ALT mild ↑), CBC
    (Leukocytosis suggests cholangitis), Lipase

-   Imaging: RUQ U/S: dilated CBD (ULN is 6mm) 🡪 MRCP/EUS vs ERCP (see
    below)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   MRCP preferred given non-invasive but has lower sensitivity for
    smaller stones (consider EUS if still have suspicion despite
    negative MRCP or if patient contraindication to/intolerance of MRI)

Management

-   NPO & IVF, pain control PRN

-   Stratify risk to determine whether to pursue MRCP (noninvasive,
    diagnostic) vs ERCP

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If any one of the following, patient is HIGH risk -\>consult GI for
    ERCP + EGS to consider cholecystectomy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CBD stone on imaging

-   Acute cholangitis

-   Tbili \> 4 AND dilated CBD (\>6mm with GB, \> 8mm without GB)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If any one of the following, patient is INTERMEDIATE risk -\>
    consider MRCP (or EUS or cholecystectomy with intraoperative
    cholangiogram)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Abnormal liver enzymes

-   Age \> 55

-   Dilated CBD on U/S with Tbili \< 4

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If CBD stone seen on MRCP or EUS -\> ERCP,

-   If no CBD stone but patient has GB sludge or cholelithiasis -\> EGS
    consult for cholecystectomy + intraoperative cholangiogram

Acute Cholangitis

-   Bacterial infection of biliary tract 2/2 obstruction (typically
    stones) or prior instrumentation (ERCP)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pts with malignant obstruction typically do not develop cholangitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presentation: Charcot triad (RUQ pain, fever, jaundice); Reynolds'
    Pentad (AMS, Hypotension)

-   Evaluation: CBC, CMP (D bili, ALP ↑↑↑) Blood Cultures, Lipase,
    Lactate

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CRP, AST/ALT can be ↑↑ as well

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Imaging: RUQ U/S: dilated CBD (ULN is 6mm), no need for MRCP/EUS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider MRCP overnight if ERCP is not being done emergently

Management:

-   NPO, IVF

-   Consult GI for urgent/emergent ERCP (generally within 24 hr)

-   If ERCP not feasible or fails to establish biliary drainage, can
    consider EUS-guided biliary drainage, percutaneous transhepatic
    cholangiography, or surgical decompression

-   Antibiotics for Biliary Disease (IDSA Guidelines):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mild to moderate acute cholecystitis (stable):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ceftriaxone 2g daily, Cefazolin 1-2g q8H

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cholangitis or Severe acute cholecystitis (unstable or
    immunocompromised):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Zosyn 3.375g q8H, Meropenem 1g q8H or Cipro 500 q12H and Flagyl 500
    q8H

-   Healthcare-associated Biliary infections: consider Vancomycin (order
    w/PK consult)

Clostridioides Difficile Infections -- Anton De Witte

Background

-   Clostridioides difficile is the causative bacteria for
    antibiotic-associated colitis

-   Always consider C. diff in a hospitalized patient with unexplained
    leukocytosis

-   Microbiology: Anaerobic gram-positive, spore-forming,
    toxin-producing bacillus

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Outside colon, exists in spore form -- resistant to heat, acid, and
    antibiotics (why we must wash our hands)

-   Spores are transferred from environment to person, once in intestine
    convert to functional vegetative, toxin-producing forms 🡪
    susceptible to antibiotics

-   To be pathogenic, must release toxin (A+B) to cause colitis and
    diarrhea

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Risk Factors: Antibiotic use (during use or typically up to 1 month
    after use), age \>65, hospitalization, enteral feeding, obesity,
    stem cell transplant, chemo, IBD, cirrhosis, +/- PPI use (no clear
    causal relationship)

Presentation

-   Spectrum from asymptomatic carrier to fulminant colitis with toxic
    megacolon

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Asymptomatic carrier: 20% of hospitalized patients (50% of adults in
    long term care facilities)

-   Non-severe disease: watery diarrhea (\>3 unformed stools in 24
    hours), lower abdominal pain, nausea, ± fever, leukocytosis (WBC
    \>15,000)

-   Severe disease: diarrhea, diffuse abdominal pain, abdominal
    distention, fever, lactic acidosis, AKI (Cr \> 1.5), marked
    leukocytosis (sometimes \>40,000)

-   Fulminant disease: Severe criteria + hypotension/shock, ileus
    (rare), or megacolon (\>7cm colon diameter and/or \>12cm cecum
    diameter)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Recurrent disease (relapse \> reinfection): resolution of symptoms
    on therapy followed by reappearance of symptoms within 2-8 weeks
    after stopping therapy; (Up to 25% of patients have recurrence)

-   If symptoms never resolve, consider refractory C. diff or
    alternative diagnosis

Evaluation

-   Stool PCR for toxigenic strains (very sensitive, can detect
    asymptomatic carriers w/o toxin production); with reflex EIA (enzyme
    immunoassay) for toxins A and B (specificity of 99%)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PCR (+)/Toxin (-) = carrier

-   PCR (+)/Toxin (+) = treat

-   PCR (-) = no treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Imaging

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Nonsevere disease: no imaging necessary

-   Severe or fulminant disease: CT a/p with oral and IV contrast

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Endoscopy: Typically used when alternative diagnosis is suspected;
    not warranted for classical symptoms, positive laboratory tests, or
    clinical response to treatment

Management

-   Contact precautions until at least 48 hours after diarrhea resolves

-   Classify patient disease severity to guide treatment algorithm

-   Do not repeat stool testing -- 50% remain positive after treatment
    up to 6 weeks later

+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Clinical        | Treatment                                          |
| Condition       |                                                    |
+=================+====================================================+
| **Non-fulminant |                                                    |
| disease**       |                                                    |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Initial episode | \-[First line]{.underline}: PO Vancomycin 125mg    |
| (non-severe or  | QID x 10 days OR PO Fidaxomicin 200mg BID x 10     |
| severe)         | days                                               |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | \-[Second line]{.underline}: (only for non-severe  |
|                 | disease in low-risk patients): PO Metronidazole    |
|                 | 500mg TID x 10-14 days                             |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Recurrent       | Consult ID +/- GI                                  |
| episode         |                                                    |
|                 | First Recurrence:                                  |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | \-[First line]{.underline}: PO Fidaxomicin 200mg   |
|                 | BID x 10 days                                      |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | \-[Second line]{.underline}: Vancomycin Taper (PO  |
|                 | 125mg QID x 14 days à PO 125mg BID x 7 days à PO   |
|                 | 125mg QD x 7 days à PO 125mg q72h x 2-8 weeks)     |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | \-[Adjunctive therapy]{.underline}: IV             |
|                 | Bezlotoxumab 10mg/kg x1                            |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | Second or Further Recurrence:                      |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | -Same as above                                     |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | -Consider Fecal Microbiota Transplantation (FMT)   |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| **Fulminant     |                                                    |
| disease**       |                                                    |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Fulminant       | Consult ID, GI and EGS                             |
| disease         |                                                    |
|                 | Ileus Absent:                                      |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | -PO Vancomycin 500mg QID + IV Metronidazole 500mg  |
|                 | TID                                                |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | Ileus Present                                      |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | -Same as above + consider Vancomycin enemas 500mg  |
|                 | q6h                                                |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | Consider colectomy or FMT                          |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+

Constipation -- Chelsie Sievers

Background

-   Definition: presence of lumpy/hard stools, straining, use of digital
    maneuvers, sensation of incomplete evacuation, frequency \<3 BM per
    week.

-   Common etiologies: opioid-induced, medications (anti-depressants,
    iron, anticholinergics) hypothyroidism, hypokalemia, pregnancy, IBS,
    neurogenic (trauma, MS, Parkinson disease, diabetes, autonomic
    dysregulation).

-   Always think about risk of obstruction (prior abdominal surgeries,
    oncology history or risk for GI/GU malignancies, history of
    IBD/Crohn's).

Evaluation

-   Evaluate etiologies plus lifestyle factors (low fiber intake, low
    fluid intake, reduced mobility, acute illness)

-   Clinical diagnosis, no need for imaging unless concerned for
    obstruction → KUB/ CT

-   BMP + Mg to evaluate electrolytes, consider TSH if chronic

-   Rectal exam to exclude rectal mass or fecal impaction
    (constipation + diarrhea doesn't exclude impaction/obstruction.
    Overflow around mass = encoparesis)

    Management

-   Stop or minimize offending medications if possible

-   Optimize lifestyle factors: out of bed, walking hallways, increase
    fluid intake, + cup of coffee if appropriate.

-   Escalating pathway: ensure meds are scheduled not PRN

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   MiraLAX (PEG) 17g BID (can give TID) + Senna nightly (can increase
    to BID and/or 2 tabs) → Bisacodyl suppository → enema (tap water or
    SMOG) → stronger osmotic laxative (lactulose 20mg once, Mag-citrate,
    Golytely) → escalate lactulose dosing 20 -- 30 mg q2hrs

    Other considerations:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid Fleet enemas (sodium-phosphate) in CKD and geriatric
    populations

-   "The hand that writes for opioids also writes a bowel regimen"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Generally, start with scheduled MiraLAX (PEG) 17g daily + senna
    nightly

-   If severe and unrelieved by escalating therapies, can try
    methylnaltrexone

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lactulose can cause severe bloating and cramping

-   In patients unable to take PO: place DHT to deliver meds or rectal
    lactulose (important for patients with cirrhosis with AMS/HE).

-   In patients with CF (at risk for distal intestinal obstruction
    syndrome): ensure have pancreatic enzymes ordered, managed more like
    constipation than true obstruction: PO/ NGT MiraLAX QID or Golytely.

-   Acute colonic pseudo-obstruction (Ogilvie\'s syndrome): \>12cm cecal
    diameter = severe dilation, risk of perforation. Treated with
    neostigmine, 2mg IV over 3 to 5 minutes. Monitor for bradycardia,
    hypotension, and dysrhythmias (relative contraindications: recent
    MI, asthma, PUD, epilepsy). Decompression with colonoscopy used in
    some cases.

-   Consider pelvic floor dysfunction, pelvic floor PT may be helpful

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Laxatives                                    
  ----------------- -------------------------- ---------------------------
  Mechanism         Examples                   Effects

  Bulking-agent     Psyllium seed (Metamucil), Absorb water and increase
                    methylcellulose (Citrucel) fecal bulk

  Osmotic Laxatives Polyethylene glycol (PEG = Hyperosmotic substances,
                    MiraLAX and Golytely),     pull fluid into GI tract
                    lactulose, mag-citrate     

  Stimulant         Senna, Bisacodyl           Stimulates peristalsis
  Laxative          (Dulcolax)                 

  Stool Softener    Docusate (Colace)          Generally ineffective

  Opioid antagonist Methylnaltrexone           Peripheral acting opioid
                    (Reslistor)                antagonist, inhibits
                                               opioid-induced decreased
                                               gastrointestinal motility

  cGMP Agonist      Linaclotide (Linzess),     Stimulates intestinal
                    Plecanatide (Trulance)     secretion of Cl-/HCO3-

  Prostaglandin     Lubiprostone (Amitiza)     Increases intestinal
  derivative                                   chloride-rich fluid
                                               secretion
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Diarrhea -- Charles Oertli

Background

-   \>3 BM/day OR abnormally loose stool

-   Acute (\<2 weeks), persistent (2-4 weeks), or chronic (\>4 weeks)

-   95% of acute diarrhea is self-limited & no additional treatment
    needed

-   Most cases of acute diarrhea are due to infections

-   Non-infectious etiologies become more common with increasing
    duration

-   Voluminous watery diarrhea more likely disorder of small bowel

-   Small volume frequent diarrhea more likely disorder of colon

-   Nocturnal diarrhea suggests an inflammatory or secretory etiology

Acute Diarrhea

Etiology

-   Watery diarrhea: viral gastroenteritis (norovirus, rotavirus,
    enteric adenovirus), C. diff, C. perfringens, S. Aureus, Bacillus
    cereus, enterotoxigenic E. coli, Cryptosporidium, Listeria,
    Cyclospora, vibrio cholerae, (Giardia is typically more chronic),
    Tropheryma whipplei, COVID

-   Inflammatory diarrhea: Salmonella, Campylobacter, Shigella, EHEC,
    Yersinia, E histolytica, invasive viruses (CMV, HSV), Non-cholera
    vibrio. Look for red flag symptoms (see below).

-   Medications, specifically antibiotics

Presentation

-   Evaluate for red flags (BATS are Vulnerable vampires)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   [B]{.underline}loody stools,

-   [A]{.underline}ntibiotics/Recent hospitalization

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Any antibiotic can cause C. diff; the longer the treatment, the more
    likely

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most common to cause C. diff: Clindamycin \>
    Penicillins/Cephalosporins/Fluoroquinolones

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   [T]{.underline}oo many stools: \>6 unformed stools/day

-   [S]{.underline}epsis (Fever) or [S]{.underline}evere abdominal pain

-   [V]{.underline}ulnerable (Age \>70 yr, immunocompromised, IVDU, IBD,
    pregnant, travel)

Evaluation

-   All patients: CBC w/ diff and BMP to eval for leukocytosis (C.diff),
    AKI, electrolyte abnormalities, thrombocytopenia/anemia (HUS),
    eosinophilia (parasites)

-   If red flag symptoms or diarrhea \> 7d: ESR/CRP, C.diff, GIPP

-   If immunocompromised: consider CMV, MAC, microsporidia

-   If abdominal pain: consider CT A/P with IV contrast

-   If concern for IBD or hx of IBD: CT Enterography with PO and IV
    contrast

-   Blood Cultures if febrile/septic

Management

-   All patients: supportive care with PO or IVF, electrolyte repletion

-   If C.diff negative or treatment for C.diff started, ok for
    symptomatic treatment with Loperamide

-   Start with Loperamide 4mg x1 then transition to 2mg QID (AC+HS)
    (maximum 16mg/day)

-   If fever or inflammatory symptoms and C.diff not back, ok for
    Bismuth sabsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol) 30mL or 2 tablets q30min x8

-   Indications for antibiotics:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   GIPP negative for Shigella, 0157:H7 (can precipitate HUS) and
    salmonella (can prolong carrier state)

-   Empiric antibiotic therapy ONLY if toxic appearance or high concern
    for progressive illness/decompensation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ciprofloxacin 500 mg BID or levofloxacin 500 mg daily x 3-5 days

-   Azithromycin 500 mg daily x 3 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ampicillin + gentamicin used for pregnant women to cover for
    Listeria

-   C. diff positive (see section below)

Approach to Chronic Diarrhea

+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Causes of Watery     |                      |                       |
| Diarrhea             |                      |                       |
+======================+======================+=======================+
| Secretory            | Motility             | Osmotic               |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Microscopic colitis  | Hyperthyroidism      | Lactose intolerance   |
|                      |                      |                       |
| Bile acid            | Diabetes             | Bile salt diarrhea    |
| malabsorption        |                      |                       |
|                      | Amyloidosis          | Sugar alcohols:       |
| Carcinoid            |                      | sorbitol, mannitol,   |
|                      | Systemic scleroderma | xylitol               |
| Crohn's disease      |                      |                       |
|                      |                      |                       |
| Gastrinoma           |                      |                       |
|                      |                      |                       |
| VIPoma               |                      |                       |
|                      |                      |                       |
| Mastocytosis         |                      |                       |
|                      |                      |                       |
| Addison's disease    |                      |                       |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Meds: antibiotics,   | Meds: macrolides,    | Meds: citrates,       |
| caffeine,            | metoclopramide,      | lactulose,            |
| colchicine, NSAIDs,  | bisacodyl, senna,    | magnesium-containing  |
| antineoplastics,     | pyridostigmine       | antacids,             |
| antiarrhythmics      |                      | mycophenolate,        |
| (digoxin),           |                      | antibiotics,          |
| metformin,           |                      | propranolol,          |
| carbamazepine        |                      | hydralazine,          |
|                      |                      | procainamide          |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Functional: IBS      |                      |                       |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Causes of Fatty Diarrhea          |                                   |
| (Steatorrhea)                     |                                   |
+===================================+===================================+
| Malabsorption                     | Inflammatory                      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Celiac disease                    | Diverticulitis                    |
|                                   |                                   |
| Gastric bypass                    | Ischemic colitis                  |
|                                   |                                   |
| Short bowel syndrome              | Neoplasia                         |
|                                   |                                   |
| Tropical Sprue                    | Radiation colitis                 |
|                                   |                                   |
| Whipple disease                   | Arsenic poisoning                 |
|                                   |                                   |
| Small intestinal bacterial        | Microscopic colitis               |
| overgrowth (SIBO)                 |                                   |
|                                   | Invasive infections: bacterial    |
| Post-infectious malabsorptive     | (tuberculosis, yersinosis), viral |
| diarrhea                          | (CMV, HSV),                       |
|                                   |                                   |
| Maldigestion                      | Parasites (amebiasis,             |
|                                   | strongyloidiasis)                 |
| Pancreatic insufficiency          |                                   |
|                                   | Inflammatory bowel disease        |
| Hepatobiliary disorders           |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Evaluation

-   Labs: CBC w/ diff, CMP, ESR/CRP, TSH, celiac serologies if high
    suspicion (anti-TTG)

-   Spot fecal elastase Steatorrhea (greasy, malodorous stools that
    float)

-   Colonoscopy indicated if alarm symptoms are present ( \>45 yrs and
    hasn't had one, or \<45 yrs and concern for IBD, CMV, ischemic
    colitis or microscopic colitis)

-   If concern for IBS: Rome IV criteria (see section on "IBS" below)

Management

-   IBS: trial elimination diet/low FODMAP, antidiarrheals

-   Pancreatic insufficiency: enzyme replacement (Creon), consult
    nutrition for assistance

-   Celiac: eliminate gluten, will need outpatient nutrition follow-up

-   Bile acid malabsorption: can try cholestyramine (can affect
    absorption of other meds)

Dysphagia -- Julie Anne Giannini

Background

-   Oropharyngeal dysphagia- difficulty initiating swallow, experiencing
    coughing, choking

-   Esophageal dysphagia- difficulty swallowing several seconds after
    initiation

    Presentation 

    Difficulty swallowing solids, liquids, or both? 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Solids only = mechanical 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Progressive symptoms: esophageal stricture, peptic stricture, or
    esophageal cancer

-   Not progressive symptoms: eosinophilic esophagitis, esophageal rings
    or web, external compression (vascular abnormalities) 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Solids and Liquids = motility disorder

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Progressive symptoms: achalasia or systemic sclerosis 

-   Not progressive symptoms: esophageal hypercontractility or
    esophageal outflow obstruction 

    Evaluation: Esophageal Dysphagia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Upper endoscopy +/- biopsy if no previous history of esophageal
    abnormalities

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Normal upper endoscopy:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Barium swallow for dysphagia to solids only if mechanical
    obstruction still suspected

-   Esophageal manometry for dysphagia to solids and liquids or
    suspecting motility disorder

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Barium swallow if history of prior radiation, caustic injury,
    surgery, suspicion for proximal esophageal lesion (Zenker's) or
    complex stricture

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Do not order if food impaction suspected or imminent endoscopy

-   Order as timed barium esophagram. If barium emptying is normal and
    tablet passes without issues, it rules out motility abnormality or
    stricture.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Esophageal manometry helps assess intraluminal pressures,
    peristalsis, and bolus transit.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Disorders of EGJ outflow: achalasia, EGJ outflow obstruction

-   Disorder of Peristalsis: absent contractility, distal esophageal
    spasm, hypercontractile esophagus, ineffective esophageal motility

    Evaluation: Oropharyngeal Dysphagia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Videofluoroscopic modified barium swallow and fiberoptic endoscopic
    evaluation of swallowing (FEES) 

    Management 

-   Food impaction: IV glucagon to relax lower esophageal sphincter vs
    urgent upper endoscopy

Odynophagia -- Ahmed Samy

Definition

-   Pain with swallowing, often accompanied by dysphagia and
    retrosternal discomfort

    Etiology: PIECE mnemonic

-   Pill-induced: antibiotics (tetracyclines), NSAIDs, ART, K-Cl,
    bisphosphonates

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diagnosis: clinical, but EGD may be warranted for persistent(\> 1wk)
    or severe symptoms

-   Rx: discontinue culprit med (or substitute with liquid formulation)
    and start PPI; Can do GI cocktail combination (maalox, benadryl,
    lidocaine) swish and swallowx 3 days.

-   Prevention: take culprit meds w/ 8 oz water and sit upright for 30
    mins after.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infectious:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Candida esophagitis: HIV (CD4 \< 100), heme malignancies, chemo,
    antibiotics, steroids

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can exist without OP thrush

-   Diagnosis: consider empiric fluconazole trial (improvement by 3-5
    days). If refractory, EGD, biopsy, culture

-   Treatment: fluconazole 400mg PO/IV day 1, then 200-400mg daily x
    14-21 days.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   HSV esophagitis: immunocompromised including transplant recipients

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diagnosis: well-circumscribed "volcano-like" ulcers on EGD, biopsy
    or brushings of ulcer edge; absence of herpes labialis or
    oropharyngeal ulcers should not preclude diagnosis

-   Rx: acyclovir 400mg PO five times daily x14-21 days
    (immunocompromised) acyclovir 200mg PO five times daily or 400mg PO
    tid x 7-10 days (immunocompetent)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CMV esophagitis: HIV (CD4 \< 50 )

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diagnosis: EGD-linear/longitudinal ulcers + confirmed pathology.
    Generally, PCR/viral load not helpful but negative serology may
    lower suspicion

-   Rx: begin treatment while path is pending- ganciclovir 5mg/kg IV
    q12h vs foscarnet (if leukopenia, low plts). Change to PO once able
    to tolerate- valganciclovir 900mg BIDx 3-6weeks.

-   Confirmed CMV esophagitis warrants optho eval for CMV retinitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Eosinophilic esophagitis (see section)

-   Caustic: alkali or acid-induced injury (household cleaners,
    batteries, pool cleaners).

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Evaluation:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ABCs, including fluid resuscitation and intubation if needed.

-   Rule out life-threatening perforation based on exam (mediastinitis,
    peritonitis), end organ damage (CBC, CMP, lactate, UDS), and imaging
    (CT-chest/abdomen w/contrast showing transmural necrosis).

-   NPO until evaluation is complete to determine the grade of injury

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid attempting to reverse ingestion with emetics or neutralizing
    agents via NG tube

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stress ulcer ppx w/ PPI. Conflicting evidence for steroids.

-   EGS consult (preemptively start broad abx) if workup is suggestive
    of urgent intervention. Otherwise, EGD \< 24hrs of ingestion to
    further grade injury

-   Lower-grade injury: start on liquid and advance to regular diet over
    24-48 hours.

-   Higher-grade injury: needs ICU-level monitoring; start PO intake at
    48 hrs, based on tolerability (liquids vs enteral vs TPN)

-   Additional information:

-   Subsequent EGD monitoring q2-3 years recommended to monitor for
    complications (esophageal stricture, SCC)

-   Ingestion is often intentional, consider psych eval if appropriate

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   GERD (see section)

Gastroparesis -- Hashim Hayat

Background

-   Syndrome of objectively delayed gastric emptying in absence of
    mechanical obstruction

-   Etiology: Diabetes (most common), post-surgical (gastric or
    bariatric surgery), thyroid dysfunction, autoimmune or neurologic
    disorders, medication-induced (GLP-1 agonists, narcotics,
    anticholinergic agents

Presentation

-   Nausea, vomiting (may contain food eaten several hours prior),
    abdominal pain (dull, crampy; rarely a predominant symptom), early
    satiety, postprandial fullness, bloating, weight loss in severe
    cases

Evaluation

-   Exclude mechanical obstruction and mucosal disease with CTE and EGD

-   Scintigraphic gastric emptying study = gold standard for diagnosis
    (measures gastric retention of solids at 4h)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stop medications that may affect gastric emptying 48 hrs prior to
    testing

-   Must have blood sugar \< 275 (Hyperglycemia delays gastric emptying)

Management

-   Support with IVF and electrolytes -- PO intake preferred

-   Glycemic control in diabetics

-   Stop offending medications

-   Nutrition consult for teaching on frequent small volume meals that
    are low in fat and soluble fiber

-   If continued symptoms after above, try prokinetics and antiemetics

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Prokinetics

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Liquid formulations preferred for better absorption

-   Give 15min before meals and at bedtime.

-   First line is Reglan. If no response, try Domperidone and
    subsequently erythromycin (not good for long term, pts develop
    tachyphylaxis)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Antiemetics: helps symptoms but do not improve gastric emptying

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In severe cases patients may require enteral feeding (post pyloric
    preferred) or venting g-tube

-   Emerging endoscopic treatment options: G-POEM (gastric peroral
    endoscopic myotomy)

GERD -- Lindsey Creech

Background

-   Reflux of stomach contents causing symptoms and/or endoscopic
    complications

-   Severity classified based on appearance of esophageal mucosa on EGD
    and frequency of symptoms.

-   Erosive esophagitis: endoscopically visible breaks in distal
    esophageal mucosa + GERD

-   Nonerosive reflux disease: presence of symptoms of GERD without
    esophageal mucosal injury and positive pH testing

Presentation

-   Esophageal symptoms: heartburn, regurgitation, chest pain,
    dysphagia, globus sensation, odynophagia

-   Extra-esophageal symptoms: chronic cough, hoarseness, asthma, chest
    pain, dental erosions, globus sensation

-   Complications: Esophageal stricture, Barrett's esophagus, esophageal
    adenocarcinoma

Evaluation

-   Clinical diagnosis with classic heartburn and/or regurgitation

-   If dx uncertain, can perform ambulatory pH monitoring

-   EGD indicated for the following:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presence of alarm features (dysphagia, persistent vomiting, GI
    cancer in 1º relative, odynophagia, GI bleeding, weight loss, iron
    deficiency anemia, age ≥ 60 y/o with new-onset GERD symptoms)

-   Risk factors for Barrett's esophagus (duration of GERD at least 5-10
    years \[must be present\], \>50 yo, male, white, hiatal hernia,
    obesity, nocturnal reflux, tobacco use, first-degree relative w/
    Barrett's and/or adenocarcinoma)

-   Abnormal UGI tract imaging (i.e. luminal abnormalities)

-   Continued symptoms despite adequate PPI therapy

Management

-   First and foremost, Lifestyle and dietary modifications:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Weight loss, elevate HOB, avoid large meals or meals within 3 hrs of
    bedtime, elimination/minimization of chocolate, caffeine, spicy
    foods, citrus, and carbonated beverages

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mild/intermittent symptoms (2x/wk) w/o erosive esophagitis (if had
    EGD):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Trial H2RA (famotidine 10mg) PRN; reassess in 4 wks

-   If persistent sx, increase H2RA BID (famotidine 20mg); reassess in 2
    wks. If sx improve, step-down therapy as tolerated

-   If persistent sx on H2RA BID, then PPI qd (omeprazole 10mg),
    increase to omeprazole 20mg if remaining uncontrolled; reassess in
    4-8 wks

-   If sx improve, discontinue PPI

-   If persistent sx, manage as refractory and refer to GI for EGD +/-
    ambulatory pH testing

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Frequent symptoms (\>2 episodes/wk, and/or severe symptoms that
    impair QOL):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PPI qd (omeprazole 20mg) for 8 wks, if sx improvement, discontinue
    PPI

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Recurrent symptoms:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   2/3 of patients w/ nonerosive reflux disease relapse when acid
    suppression is discontinued

-   If ≥3 months after discontinuing, repeat 8-wk course of PPI

-   If \<3 months of discontinuing, EGD (if not already performed) to
    rule out other etiologies or complications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Erosive esophagitis and Barrett's esophagus:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Require maintenance acid suppression with a standard dose PPI
    (omeprazole 20mg) daily given likelihood of recurrent symptoms and
    complications if stopped

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PPI use:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Should be prescribed at lowest dose and for shortest duration
    appropriate

-   Most effective if taken 30-60min before first meal of the day

-   Taper if taking \>6 mo, then transition to H2RA PRN for mild or
    intermittent sx

-   Long term side effects: Very well tolerated, high-quality RCTs show
    slightly higher risk of enteric infections (such as C.diff)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If pregnant patient, start with antacids or sucralfate

-   If elderly patient, attempt to wean off PPI/H2RA or discontinue with
    goal of using antacid PRN (due to side effects of H2RA and PPI)

Eosinophilic Esophagitis -- Caroline Barrett

Background

-   Pt usually with a history of asthma/allergies/eczema

-   Dysphagia (most commonly to solid foods), food impaction, central
    chest pain, GERD/refractory heartburn, upper abdominal pain

Evaluation

-   Diagnostic criteria

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Symptoms related to esophageal dysfunction

-   EGD with \>15 eos/hpf on biopsy and exclusion of other causes

-   50-60% pts will have elevated serum IgE lvl; peripheral eosinophilia
    can be seen but is generally mild.

Management

-   Dietary elimination to identify the food trigger vs. Medical
    management (PPI therapy, topical steroids, or Dupixent). If PPI
    route, select high dose PPI (omeprazole 40mg by mouth 30-60 mins
    prior to breakfast and dinner, followed by EGD in 3 months to
    evaluate response, and if in remission, can wean to Q day dosing for
    maitnenance).

-   Alternative treatment is swallowed budesonide or fluticasone

-   Intermittent dilation of strictures to relieve dysphagia, but no
    effect on underlying inflammation

-   Allergy testing is not helpful in predicting dietary trigger. Hence,
    skin-based testing or IgE testing is not recommended.

Peptic Ulcer Disease -- Kinsley Ojukwu

Background

-   Peptic ulcer disease (PUD) occurs when there is a break (ulceration)
    in the lining of the stomach or duodenum.

-   Ulcer is \>5mm break in the mucosa, with extension through
    muscularis mucosa or deeper layers. Erosion is \<5mm.

    Etiology

-   H-Pylori infection \> NSAID use \>\>\> ZES associated gastrinoma

-   Other associated factors: smoking, EtOH, acute stress, malignancy,
    and glucocorticoids in combination with NSAIDs

    Presentation

-   Episodic aching, gnawing, or burning epigastric pain; N/V, heartburn
    alleviated by antiacids.

-   Gastric ulcers (pain worse w/eating, weight loss); duodenal ulcers
    (pain better w/eating, worse on empty stomach, worse at night)

-   May be asymptomatic until complications such as hemorrhage or
    perforation

-   Alarm features: unintentional weight loss, persistent vomiting,
    melena, unexplained iron deficiency anemia, progressive dysphagia,
    early satiety, palpable abdominal mass, left supraclavicular
    lymphadenopathy (Virchow node)

    Evaluation

-   EGD for complicated PUD, patients with alarm sx, or dyspepsia w/ age
    \>60

-   CBC, H Pylori testing if no strong NSAID use

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   H. Pylori endoscopic tests (biopsy urease, histology, culture)

-   H. Pylori non-endoscopic tests (Serology -- IgG, Urea Breath test,
    stool antigen

-   Most H. Pylori tests affected by PPI and/or antibiotic use; stop PPI
    1-2 weeks prior to testing; serology testing is not useful post
    treatment.

    Management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   General: treat underlying cause, encourage smoking cessation, limit
    ETOH, stop NSAIDs

-   Uncomplicated peptic ulcer (non H. pylori)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Oral PPI (e.g., omeprazole 20 to 40 mg daily) x 4 weeks (duodenal
    ulcers) or 8 weeks (gastric ulcers)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Uncomplicated peptic ulcer and + H. Pylori

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Oral PPI BID x14 days with combination antibiotic regimen

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Macrolide exposure/resistance: Bismuth Quadruple Therapy

-   No Macrolide exposure/resistance: Clarithromycin Triple Therapy
    (Amoxicillin)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   FYI: There is an order set for H pylori regimen in EPIC at VUMC

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Confirm H. pylori eradication (via stool antigen test, urease breath
    test, or EGD \>4 weeks after completion of therapy. If not
    eradicated, re-treat:

    -   Clarithromycin Triple Therapy -\> Bismuth Quadruple Therapy

    -   Bismuth Quadruple Therapy -\> Levofloxacin Triple Therapy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Complicated peptic ulcer (bleeding, perforation, gastric outlet
    obstruction)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gastric or duodenal ulcer perforation is a surgical emergency; will
    clinically present as peritonitis, but may be subtle in
    older/immunocompromised pts

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fluid resuscitation, NG decompression, acid suppression, empiric
    antibiotic therapy, EGS consult

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   EGD is indicated to determine etiology and for possible treatment,
    however surgery is often indicated.

-   IV PPI (if bleeding: IV PPI for 72 hrs after endoscopic treatment,
    then oral PPI)

    Additional Information

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Continue maintenance PPI therapy (omeprazole 20 mg daily) for the
    following:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Peptic ulcer \>2 cm and age \>50 or multiple co-morbidities

-   Frequently recurrent peptic ulcers (\>2 in one year)

-   H. pylori-negative, NSAID-negative ulcer disease

-   Failure to eradicate H. pylori (including salvage therapy)

-   Condition requiring long term aspirin/NSAID use

-   Persistent ulcer on repeat EGD (if performed)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indications for repeat EGD (8-12 weeks):

    -   Persistent/recurrent symptoms despite medical therapy

    -   Complicated ulcer (bleeding), with evidence of ongoing bleeding

    -   Giant gastric ulcer (\>2 cm) or features of malignancy at
        initial endoscopy

    -   Gastric ulcer that was not biopsied or inadequately sampled on
        initial EGD

    -   Gastric ulcer in pt w/risk factors for gastric cancer (\>50
        yo, H. pylori, immigrant from high prevalence area \[Japan,
        Korea, Taiwan, Costa Rica\], FHx, presence of gastric atrophy,
        adenoma, dysplasia, intestinal metaplasia)

    -   In refractory dyspepsia, consider alternative etiologies:
        malignancy, infection (CMV), Crohn's, eosinophilic
        gastroenteritis -- all can mimic PUD and present as ulcers in
        the stomach and duodenum

GI Bleeding -- Alex DeWeerd

Background

-   Intraluminal blood loss anywhere from the nasopharynx/oral cavity to
    the anus

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Don't forget epistaxis or oropharyngeal bleeding as possible source
    of melena

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IV PPI prior to endoscopy may ↓ need for endoscopic therapy but does
    not impact transfusion requirement, rebleeding risk, need for
    surgical intervention, or mortality

-   Classification: relative location to the Ligament of Treitz (LoT)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Upper = proximal to LoT

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PUD, gastritis (alcohol, stress, NSAIDs, ASA), esophagitis, variceal
    bleed, Mallory-Weiss tear, AVM, Dieulafoy's lesion, aorto-enteric
    fistula, gastric antral vascular ectasias, malignancy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lower = distal to LoT

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diverticular bleed, ischemic/infectious/IBD/radiation colitis,
    malignancy, angiodysplasia, anorectal (hemorrhoids, anal fissure),
    Meckel's diverticulum, post-polypectomy bleed

Historical factors to consider when trying to identify source of
bleeding

-   Cirrhosis or chronic alcohol use: varices or portal hypertensive
    gastropathy

-   Hx of AAA or aortic graft: aorto-enteric fistula

-   Hx of renal disease, aortic stenosis, HHT: angiodysplasia

-   Hx of H. pylori, NSAID use, tobacco use: PUD

-   Hx of tobacco use, H. pylori, weight loss, early satiety, dysphagia,
    change in bowel habits: malignancy

-   Painless hematochezia: diverticular bleed

-   Abdominal pain: colitis

-   Look out for false positives: bismuth, charcoal, licorice, and iron

Presentation

-   Hematemesis (very specific for upper GI bleed), hematochezia
    (usually lower although brisk upper possible), melena (usually
    upper), coffee-ground emesis, epigastric/abdominal pain, acute or
    chronic, hx of GI bleed and prior endoscopies.

-   Exam: VITALS -- assess hemodynamic stability to determine
    resuscitation needs, MICU vs. floor; orthostatic vs, rectal exam
    every time (smear stool on white tissue paper to look for melena),
    look for signs of cirrhosis (jaundice, palmar erythema, ascites,
    spider angiomata)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Vital signs that may help estimate severity of bleed:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Blood loss \<15% - resting tachycardia

-   Blood loss 15-40% - orthostatic hypotension

-   Blood loss \>40% - supine hypotension

Evaluation

-   CBC, PT/INR, CMP, Lactic Acid, Blood Gas

-   BUN/Crt ratio \> 30:1 more predictive of upper GI bleed, \<20:1 more
    predictive of lower GI bleed

-   EGD: usually best

-   Difficulty localizing GIB: pill-capsule, balloon enteroscopy
    Meckel's scan, tagged RBC scan

-   Massive lower GI bleeds will require arteriography

Management

-   Secure airway (intubation) if comatose, extremely combative, or
    massive hematemesis

-   At least 2 large bore IV's (\> 18 gauge) -- ask nurses directly to
    ensure these are placed

-   Maintain active type and screen

-   Bolus IVF to maintain MAP \>65H/H monitoring q6-q12 hours;
    transfusions as indicated

-   Active bleeding: Start IV PPI (pantoprazole) 40 mg BID if thought to
    be upper/possible ulcer. If no active bleeding, can start IV PPI
    40mg qd

-   If cirrhotic, Ceftriaxone 1g daily for empiric SBP prophylaxis

-   If possibility of variceal bleed: Octreotide IV 50 mcg x1 then 50
    mcg/hr drip x 3-5 days

-   NPO if unstable vs. clear liquids (no reds or purples) until morning
    for EGD

-   Balloon tamponade can be temporizing measure for uncontrolled
    hemorrhage 2/2 EV (needs to be intubated if device is placed)

-   For massive lower GI bleed: If hemodynamically unstable, consult IR
    and get a CTA abd/pelvis while doing fluid and blood product
    resuscitation. If hemodynamically stable, start with upper endoscopy
    to rule out UGIB. If source not identified on EGD, get CT
    angiography (if actively bleeding) or colonoscopy (if severe
    bleeding has stopped). If source not identified, investigate for
    small bowel bleed.

-   Never give prep to a patient for colonoscopy (GoLytely) without
    discussing with GI fellow

-   Consult gastroenterology to facilitate endoscopy. Consider
    consulting hematology if emergent anticoagulant reversal agent is
    needed.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If endoscopy is unable to stop bleeding -\> IR is next who can
    embolize

-   If embolization fails -\> EGS for source removal

Ileus -- Julie Giannini

Background

-   Non-mechanical decrease or stoppage of flow of intestinal contents.

-   Result of a neuroimmune interaction that consists of the early
    neurogenic phase (autonomic nervous system) and the inflammatory
    phase (immune system).

-   Risk factors: critically ill patients, s/p abdominal or
    retroperitoneal surgery, or perioperative complications (pneumonia
    or abscess).

-   Other risk factors: opioid use, intra-abdominal
    inflammation/infection, bleeding, hypokalemia, and delayed enteral
    nutrition.

    Presentation

-   Abdominal distention, bloating, N/V, inability to pass flatus,
    sparse/absent bowel sounds, often with slower onset than seen in a
    mechanical bowel obstruction

-   Pain is often diffuse, persistent, and w/o peritoneal signs

    Evaluation

-   Plain abdominal films: supine and upright films may show dilated
    small bowel loops, air in the colon and rectum w/o a transition
    point.

-   If plain films are not diagnostic, CT w/ oral/IV contrast to help
    identify presence of transition point

-   BMP

    Management

-   Treating the underlying cause, bowel rest, IV fluids, +/- NG
    decompression, decrease opioids, ambulation

-   Small bowel follow-through with gastrografin or water-soluble
    contrast does not help ileus

Inflammatory Bowel Disease -- Krissie Lobon

Background

-   Ulcerative colitis (UC): colon only (can have backwash ileitis) and
    almost always involves the rectum; contiguous lesions; mucosal
    inflammation

-   Crohn's disease (CD): any part of the GI tract; "skip lesions";
    transmural inflammation

-   Important historical considerations to include in your documentation
    and presentation:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Location of disease (CD: LB/SB, LB only, SB only; UC: proctitis,
    left-sided or pancolitis)

-   Complications: Fistulas, sinus tracts, strictures, perianal disease,
    microperforation (more commonly in CD)

-   Include previous endoscopy and imaging findings; current and prior
    IBD treatment and reason for transition (SEs, failure), primary IBD
    provider

Genetics and Epidemiology

-   First-degree relatives of people with IBD are 20x more likely to be
    diagnosed with the condition; however, only 15% of patients with IBD
    have a first-degree relative with the disease

-   Genetic predisposition: CD \> UC

-   The number of individuals affected by IBD across the globe has
    increased from 3.7 mil (1990) to 6.8 mil (2017)

-   Age of onset 15-30, though can present at any age. A bimodal age
    distribution with second peak between 50-80 is also seen

-   Smoking is a risk factor for CD and increases risk of complications
    of CD. Does not increase risk for UC.

Presentation

-   UC: frequent diarrhea (often bloody), tenesmus, urgency, abdominal
    pain; may have fever, malaise, symptomatic anemia, and weight loss

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Complications: severe bleeding/anemia, fulminant colitis, toxic
    megacolon, perforation, colorectal cancer

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CD: abdominal pain, nausea/vomiting, fever, malaise, weight loss;
    May also have diarrhea (± bloody depending on CD location)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Complications: fistulas (entero-enteric, entero-vesicular,
    entero-cutaneous, rectovaginal, perianal, retroperitoneal),
    abscesses, strictures, obstruction

-   Small bowel involvement (\>100 cm of terminal ileum) can lead to fat
    malabsorption 2/2 impaired enterohepatic circulation of bile salts

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Extra-intestinal (EI): arthritis, sacro-iliitis, uveitis,
    episcleritis, aphthous ulcers, erythema nodosum, pyoderma
    gangrenosum, PSC (esp. UC), nephrolithiasis (calcium oxalate),
    thromboembolism, metabolic bone disease

-   Disease severity (mild, moderate, severe) can be objectively
    measured using different indices, for example the Montreal
    classification of severity of UC is one such index that stratifies
    UC and CD. Crohn's Disease Activity Index (CDAI) is also used as a
    grading system to describe disease activity. The frequency and
    severity of diarrhea, systemic symptoms, and lab abnormalities are
    also considerations of classification of IBD.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Ulcerative Colitis      Crohn's Disease
  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------
  Site                    Colon only, can have    Any part of the GI
                          ileitis                 tract

  Distribution            Diffusely throughout    Focal, "skip lesions",
                          colon; mucosa and       transmural inflammation
                          submucosa inflammation  
                          only                    

  Histology               Crypt abscess           Non-caseating
                                                  granulomas

  Complications           Toxic megacolon,        Fistulas, strictures,
                          colorectal cancer       abscesses, obstruction

  Perianal disease        Rare                    Common

  Extraintestinal         Common                  Common
  Manifestations                                  
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Evaluation

-   CBC w/diff, CMP, CRP, ESR, ± blood cultures, ± CMV PCR

-   If diarrhea: GI Pathogen panel and C. diff, consider stool cultures,
    O&P

-   If anemic: obtain iron studies and type & screen

-   If weight loss or concern for malnutrition: albumin, pre-albumin,
    Vitamin D, B12, folate

-   Imaging:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CT Enterography (oral contrast) preferred in CD, for
    luminal/extra-luminal complications

-   How to order CTE: "CT abdomen pelvis enterography", order barium
    (Volumen) 0.1% oral suspension x2, 1st dose to be given by nurse 60
    min before study, 2nd study to be given 30 min before (nurse should
    be in contact with CT tech)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Biopsies of the colon obtained on endoscopy are necessary to
    establish chronicity and exclude other causes of colitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid colonoscopy in an acute flare, risk for toxic megacolon

-   Flexible sigmoidoscopy to see rectum and distal sigmoid colon can be
    considered instead

Management

-   Acute Flare

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Check for infectious etiology for acute flare: Send stool for C.diff
    and GI pathogen panel

-   Pain control: usually a major component of hospital course

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid NSAIDs, oral pain medications are preferred

-   If pain is difficult to control, consider Acute Pain Service consult

-   Narcotics and Imodium are contraindicated in toxic megacolon

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Antibiotics: appropriately treat infections (intra-abdominal or
    perianal abscess) with antibiotics (consider prior culture data,
    often use cipro/flagyl)

-   VTE Prophylaxis: All IBD patients, even if having blood in stool
    (unless requiring transfusion) as they are at much higher risk of
    VTE

-   Nutrition: Nutrition consult for all IBD patients; For severe
    malnutrition or if prolonged bowel rest is needed, TPN is sometimes
    initiated

-   Anemia: Ferritin \<100 or iron sat \<20 with ferritin \<300,
    consider iron infusions (if no bacteremia) or transfuse for severe
    anemia

-   Smoking Cessation (esp. with CD): discuss smoking cessation &
    consult tobacco cessation

-   Consult Colorectal Surgery (not EGS): SBO, toxic megacolon, bowel
    perforation, peritonitis

-   Ensure consideration of other causes of colitis as above evaluation
    suggests (infectious, vascular, drug-induced)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Immunosuppression: (Infections must be ruled out and/or treated
    before starting)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Steroids:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Methylprednisolone (Solumedrol); often 30 mg BID for three days

    -   If multiple days without improvement, IBD providers will often
        consider initiation of biologics/immunomodulators

-   Budesonide (Entocort): non-systemic steroid released during
    intestinal transit

-   Transition to oral (40 mg prednisone daily) once clinically
    improved/tolerating PO; typically prescribe a prolonged taper on
    discharge (often down by 5 mg every week)

-   If severe proctitis: consider rectal steroids (hydrocortisone
    enema/foam)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If lack of response to steroids: additional medical therapy
    (biologics), bowel rest with TPN, or surgical intervention

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infliximab (Inflectra) is available at VUMC

-   Also consider possibility of CMV colitis (usually evaluated by
    biopsy on flex sig or colonoscopy, does not always correlate w/
    blood CMV PCR level)

-   Prior to initiating a biologic, all patients must have the following
    negative studies within the last year: Quantiferon Gold and CXR,
    Hepatitis B serologies, HIV, urine histoplasma Ag (some providers)

Intestinal Ischemia -- Ashley Ciosek

Acute Mesenteric Ischemia

Presentation

-   Early: Abdominal pain is most common symptom, abdominal distension
    ("pain out of proportion to exam", meaning pain develops before abd
    tenderness)

-   Late: As transmural bowel infarction develops, abdomen becomes
    distended, bowel sounds become absent, and peritoneal signs develop 

-   Arterial occlusion: Sudden onset, severe periumbilical pain, nausea
    and emesis

-   Venous thrombosis: More insidious onset abdominal pain, waxing and
    waning

-   Non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia: variable location and severity of
    abdominal pain; often overshadowed by a precipitating disorder

    Pathophysiology

-   Sudden onset ↓ or absence of blood flow to the small intestines

-   Mesenteric arterial occlusion:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Arterial embolism: Associated with cardiac arrhythmias (atrial
    fibrillation), valvular disease, endocarditis, ventricular aneurysm,
    aortic atherosclerosis, and aortic aneurysm

-   Arterial thrombosis: Most commonly from atherosclerotic disease; can
    also be 2/2 abdominal trauma, infection, or dissection

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Venous thrombosis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Associated w/ hypercoagulable states, malignancy, prior abdominal
    surgery, abdominal mass 🡪 venous compression, intra-abdominal
    inflammatory processes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Intestinal hypoperfusion and vasoconstriction; associated with
    decreased cardiac output, sepsis, vasopressor use

    Evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Type and Screen, Lactic acid, BMP, CBC

-   Imaging: KUB: Normal in \> 25% of cases

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ileus w/ distended bowel loops, bowel wall thickening, ± pneumatosis
    intestinalis (bowel wall air)

-   Free intraperitoneal air 🡪 immediate abdominal ex-lap

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CT Angiography: no oral contrast, obscures mesenteric vessels, ↓
    bowel wall enhancement

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Focal or segmental bowel wall thickening, intestinal pneumatosis,
    portal vein gas, porto-mesenteric thrombosis, mesenteric arterial
    calcification, mesenteric artery occlusion

    Management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   General: IVFs, NPO, hemodynamic monitoring and support (try to avoid
    vasoconstricting agents), anticoagulation, broad-spectrum
    antibiotics, pain control

-   If develops peritonitis or evidence of perforation on CT 🡪 EGS
    consult for surgery

-   Mesenteric arterial embolism: Embolectomy vs. local infusion of
    thrombolytic agent

-   Mesenteric arterial thrombosis: Surgical revascularization vs.
    thrombolysis with endovascular angioplasty and stenting

-   Venous thrombosis: Anticoagulation; possible thrombolysis if
    persistent symptoms

-   Non-occlusive disease: Treat underlying cause, stop vasoconstriction
    meds, consider intra-arterial vasodilator infusion

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Acute Mesenteric Ischemia           Ischemic Colitis
  ----------------------------------- -----------------------------------
  Abd pain early on, then abd         Abd tenderness \> abd pain
  tenderness later ("pain out of      
  proportion")                        

  Acute illness, afib, endocarditis   90% patients are \>60 y/o

  BRBPR less common overall (\>24 hrs BRBPR onset \<24 hrs into pain
  after pain starts)                  episode

  Dx: CT angio abd                    Dx: colonoscopy
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Chronic Mesenteric Ischemia

Background

-   ↓ blood flow to intestines, typically caused by atherosclerosis of
    mesenteric vessel; risk factors include smoking, diabetes, sedentary
    lifestyle, age

-   Also known as intestinal angina

-   High-grade mesenteric vascular stenoses in at least two major
    vessels (celiac, SMA, or IMA) must be established

Presentation

-   Recurrent dull, crampy, postprandial (\<60min to onset) abdominal
    pain

-   Pts develop food aversion and often have associated weight loss

Evaluation

-   CTA abdomen/pelvis is preferred (\>90% sensitivity and specificity)

-   Can also consider duplex U/S (NPV \~99%), though less helpful if
    large habitus or prior abd surgery

Management

-   Conservative management if asymptomatic: smoking cessation and
    secondary prevention to limit progression of atherosclerotic disease

-   Nutritional evaluation

-   Revascularization (open vs. endovascular) is indicated if symptoms
    are present

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mesenteric angioplasty and stenting is first-line therapy

-   Open revascularization preferred in younger pts and those w/
    re-stenosis

-   Goal is to prevent future bowel infarction

Ischemic Colitis

Background

-   Sudden, transient reduction in blood flow to colon

-   Typically at "watershed" regions of colon, such as the splenic
    flexure and rectosigmoid junction

-   Most often nonocclusive (95% of cases) and affects older adults

-   Risk factors: ACS, hemodialysis, shock, aortoiliac instrumentation,
    cardiopulmonary bypass, extreme exercise (marathon running)

Presentation

-   Rapid onset, mild cramping abdominal pain, associated with urge to
    defecate, hematochezia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hematochezia is more commonly indicative of colonic (rather than
    small bowel) ischemia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tenderness present (typically over left side)

Evaluation

-   Lactic acid (nonspecific but elevated), LDH, CPK, CBC
    (leukocytosis), BMP (metabolic acidosis)

-   KUB

-   CT A/P with IV contrast (and oral contrast if patient can tolerate)

-   Consider CTA A/P if suspicion for vascular occlusion

-   Colonoscopy confirms diagnosis. 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Edematous, friable mucosa; erythema; and interspersed pale areas;
    bluish hemorrhagic nodules representing submucosal bleeding

-   Segmental distribution, abrupt transition between injured and
    non-injured mucosa

Management

-   General: IVFs, bowel rest, antibiotics (Zosyn vs. CTX/Flagyl)

+--------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Is     |                           |                                |
| chemic |                           |                                |
| C      |                           |                                |
| olitis |                           |                                |
| Mana   |                           |                                |
| gement |                           |                                |
+========+===========================+================================+
|        | **Classification**        | **Management**                 |
+--------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| **     | No risk factors\*         | Supportive care and            |
| Mild** |                           | observation                    |
|        |                           |                                |
|        |                           | Antibiotics can be stopped if  |
|        |                           | no ulceration                  |
+--------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| **Mode | 1-3 risk factors          | Same as mild ischemia if no    |
| rate** |                           | vascular occlusion             |
|        |                           |                                |
|        |                           | Systemic anticoagulation +/-   |
|        |                           | vascular intervention if       |
|        |                           | mesenteric occlusion           |
+--------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| **Se   | \> 3 risk factors,        | Consult EGS for abdominal      |
| vere** | peritoneal signs,         | exploration and segmental      |
|        | pneumatosis,              | resection                      |
|        | pneumoperitoneum,         |                                |
|        | gangrene or pancolonic    |                                |
|        | ischemia on colonoscopy   |                                |
+--------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+
| ***    |                           |                                |
| \*Risk |                           |                                |
| fact   |                           |                                |
| ors:** |                           |                                |
| male,  |                           |                                |
| SBP    |                           |                                |
| \<90,  |                           |                                |
| HR     |                           |                                |
| \>100, |                           |                                |
| WBC    |                           |                                |
| \>15k, |                           |                                |
| Hgb    |                           |                                |
| \<12,  |                           |                                |
| Na     |                           |                                |
| \<136, |                           |                                |
| BUN    |                           |                                |
| \>20,  |                           |                                |
| LDH    |                           |                                |
| \>350, |                           |                                |
| is     |                           |                                |
| olated |                           |                                |
| right  |                           |                                |
| -sided |                           |                                |
| c      |                           |                                |
| olonic |                           |                                |
| involv |                           |                                |
| ement, |                           |                                |
| abd    |                           |                                |
| ominal |                           |                                |
| pain   |                           |                                |
| with   |                           |                                |
| rectal |                           |                                |
| ble    |                           |                                |
| eding* |                           |                                |
+--------+---------------------------+--------------------------------+

Irritable Bowel Syndrome -- Kathryn Welp

Background

-   Diagnose by the Rome IV criteria, no longer a diagnosis of exclusion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Recurrent abdominal pain on average at least 1 day/week in the last
    3 months with an onset at least 6 months prior, associated
    with **two or more** of the following criteria

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pain related to defecation

-   Change in frequency of stool

-   Change in form (appearance) of stool

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Patient has none of the following warning signs: \>50yrs, evidence
    of GIB, nocturnal pain or BMs, unintentional weight loss, family hx
    of colorectal cancer or IBD, palpable abdominal mass or LAD, IDA,
    +FOBT

-   Classified based on predominant bowel habits

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diarrhea: \>25% BMs with Bristol stool types 6 or 7

-   Constipation: \>25% BMs with Bristol stool types 1 or 2

-   Mixed: both of above

Evaluation

-   Thorough H&P for alarm symptoms as above

-   Consider limited testing with CBC, CMP, CRP, celiac serology (TTG,
    anti-gliadin, etc), fecal calprotectin

Management

-   \(1\) Lifestyle/Dietary Modifications:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Increased physical activity, low FODMAP diet (I: Eliminate high
    FODMAP foods for 4-6 wks, II: Incorporate foods back into diet and
    see what's tolerable)

-   No evidence for probiotics (can potentially worsen bloating 2/2
    SIBO)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \(2\) Psychosocial Treatment:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CBT, psychotherapy, therapeutic physician-patient relationship

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \(3\) Pharmacologic Treatment:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pain: colicky abdominal pain, avoid opioids

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Peppermint oil (smooth muscle relaxant) -- IBGuard, Iberogast

-   Antispasmodics: Hyosciamine acts faster than Dicyclomine

-   TCAs (slow GI transit): Amitriptyline or nortriptyline (causes less
    constipation so better in IBS-C)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diarrhea:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ondansetron (8mg TID), Loperamide (up to 16g qd), Rifaximin (550mg
    BID for 2 wks), Eluxadoline (75-100mg BID); consider Lomotil if
    refractory

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Constipation:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fiber (Ispaghula husk orange), Miralax, Linzess (first line but can
    be expensive), Trulance, or Amitiza

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   SSRIs, SNRIs for concomitant mood disorders

-   Gabapentin, Lyrica

Large Bowel Obstruction -- Kathryn Welp

Background

-   Mostly occurs distal to the transverse colon due to decreased
    colonic lumen diameter.

-   60% due to colon cancer, often the initial presenting symptom..

-   Ddx: SBO, toxic megacolon, Ogilvie's syndrome, paralytic ileus,
    ischemic colitis

Etiology

-   Malignancy

-   Benign

    -   Volvulus (cecal, sigmoid)

    -   Strictures (associated with diverticular disease, IBD, prior
        colorectal resection)

    -   Fecal impaction

    -   Less common: adhesions, hernia

Presentation

-   Bloating, infraumbilical crampy abdominal pain, and obstipation

-   Focal tenderness or peritoneal signs is concerning for ischemia

-   N/V can occur with proximal obstructions or in incompetent ileocecal
    valve

-   In subacute cases: change in bowel patterns over time

Evaluation:

-   CBC w/ diff, BMP, CEA (if imaging concerning for malignancy)

-   Abdominal CT: \>90% sensitivity and specificity for detecting LBO.
    Demonstrates dilated colon proximal to a transition point with
    collapsed distal colon.

    -   3-6-9 rule (describes normal bowel diameter): small bowel \<3
        cm, large bowel \<6 cm, cecum \<9 cm

-   Abdominal XR: nonspecific with poor sensitivity.

Management

-   Oral bowel prep contraindicated.

-   Initial supportive care: bowel rest, electrolyte correction, IVF,
    and gastric decompression.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Unstable: peritoneal signs, closed-loop obstructions \--\> emergency
    surgery

-   Stable:

    -   Endoscopic stenting (more commonly for L-sided obstructions)

    -   Malignant obstructions require surgery for definitive management

-   Volvulus:

    -   Cecal \--\> surgery

    -   Sigmoid \--\> endoscopic detorsion before semi-elective surgery
        (unless unstable)

Small Bowel Obstruction (SBO) -- Alex Wiles

Background

-   Risk Factors: prior abdominal surgeries (adhesions), malignancy,
    hernia, intestinal inflammation (IBD)/stricture, radiation, abscess,
    foreign bodies

-   Indicators for bowel ischemia: fever, leukocytosis, tachycardia,
    peritonitis

-   Ddx: early appendicitis, large bowel obstruction, Ogilvie's, DKA,
    Pancreatitis, IBD, Gastric outlet obstruction

Presentation

-   Nausea, emesis, intermittent colic, bloating, constipation

-   Obstipation if completely obstructed, loss of flatulence

-   Exam: classically with "tinkling" bowel sounds, tympanic abdomen,
    distended abdomen

Evaluation

-   CBC, BMP, lipase, hepatic function panel, lactate (sensitive, not
    specific for ischemia)

-   Start with KUB to rule out perforation but typically will require CT
    (x-ray only \~80% sensitive)

-   CT abdomen/pelvis with IV contrast is optimal study if adequate
    renal function

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   No oral contrast (American College of Radiology (ACR)
    Appropriateness Criteria) as it will not aid diagnosis and can lead
    to aspiration; IV helps evaluate ischemia

-   Key word: transition point

-   Non-specific signs of bowel inflammation: bowel wall thickening,
    submucosal edema

Management

-   Consult EGS: if any concern for SBO, evaluate need for urgent
    surgery

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Surgical indications 🡪 complete obstruction, CT with ischemia,
    perforation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gastric decompression: place NGT (prevent aspiration)

-   NPO until obstruction relieved and NGT removed

-   Fluids: two large bore IVs (nursing communication); LR bolus +
    maintenance while NPO

-   If no resolution of partial obstruction at 48 hours:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fluoroscopy Upper GI small bowel ft (follow through)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In comments, write "Gastrografin contrast" (water-soluble contrast)
    which osmotically reduces bowel wall edema and aids peristalsis

-   If gastrografin reaches the colon within 24 hours, it predicts
    clinical resolution of SBO without surgery

-   Note this can also be therapeutic for pSBO and get bowels moving

Nausea & Vomiting -- Taylor Riggs

Etiology: VOMMIIT mnemonic

-   [V]{.underline}estibular: Labyrinthitis, vestibular neuritis,
    Meniere's disease, cerebellar stroke

-   [O]{.underline}bstruction: adhesions, hernia, volvulus,
    constipation, gastric outlet obstruction

-   [M]{.underline}otility: gastroparesis, GERD, autonomic dysfunction

-   [M]{.underline}edications: antibiotics, SSRI, opioids, cannabinoid
    hyperemesis

-   [I]{.underline}nfection: gastroenteritis, hepatitis, pyelonephritis,
    cholecystitis

-   [I]{.underline}nflammation: PUD, pancreatitis

-   [T]{.underline}oxins: uremia, ketoacidosis, hypercalcemia,
    chemotherapy

Evaluation

-   All patients: CBC (leukocytosis, Hgb), BMP (AG, Ca, lytes, AKI),
    LFTs, lipase, lactate, UA

-   If risk factors: consider TSH, AM cortisol, troponin, β hCG, UDS

-   EKG to eval for ischemia and baseline QTc

-   Imaging

    -   If concern for obstruction (abd distention, decreased BMs) 🡪
        KUB, consider CT A/P

    -   If concern for biliary pathology (RUQ pain, abnl LFTs) 🡪 RUQ U/S

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If vestibular/concern for CNS pathology 🡪 CTH vs MRI brain

Management: Address underlying cause and stop medications as appropriate

-   Many antiemetics prolong QTc, however in patients without underlying
    cardiac conduction abnormality, electrolyte abnormality, or organ
    failure the risk of QTc prolongation leading to significant
    arrhythmia is low.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Obtain screening EKG in patients with underlying heart disease,
    electrolyte abnormalities, organ failure or on other QTc prolonging
    meds (antiarrhythmics, antipsychotics, antibiotics)

-   4-8 mg of IV Zofran is estimated to prolong QTc by \~6ms

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Try to pick a medication that will address the underlying etiology
    of nausea

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If patient does not respond to a medication in a certain class, try
    a medication from a different class (see below)

+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| Anti-Emetics  |                  |                      |           |
+===============+==================+======================+===========+
| Med (by       | Typical Dose     | Side Effects         | Prolongs  |
| class)        |                  |                      | QT?       |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| **Serotonin   |                  |                      |           |
| antagonists** |                  |                      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| Ondansetron   | 4-8mg PO/IV q6h  | Constipation,        | Yes       |
| (Zofran)      |                  | headache,            |           |
|               |                  | arrhythmia,          |           |
|               |                  | serotonin syndrome   |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| Granisetron   | 1 mg PO BID, 2mg | ''                   | Yes       |
|               | pre-chemo, OR    |                      |           |
| (Kytril)1     | 10mcg/kg IV      |                      |           |
|               | pre-chemo        |                      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| **Dopamine    |                  |                      |           |
| Antagonists** |                  |                      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| Pro           | 5-10 mg PO/IV    | EPS, less sedation   | Yes       |
| chlorperazine | q6h, 25 mg PR    | than H-blockers      |           |
| (Compazine)   | q6h              | (e.g. Phenergan)     |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| Haloperidol   | 0.5-1 mg PO/IV   | EPS, arrhythmia      | Yes       |
|               | q6h              |                      |           |
| (Haldol)      |                  |                      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| Zyprexa       | 5 -10mg PO       | EPS, constipation,   | Mild \^   |
| (Olanzapine)  | qdaily           | anticholinergic      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| **Dopamine    |                  |                      |           |
| and Serotonin |                  |                      |           |
| Antagonists** |                  |                      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| M             | 10 mg PO/IV q6h  | EPS/dystonia,        | Yes       |
| etoclopramide |                  | arrhythmias,         |           |
| (Reglan)      |                  | d                    |           |
|               |                  | rowsiness/dizziness, |           |
|               |                  | diarrhea             |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| **GABA-A      |                  |                      |           |
| Agonist**     |                  |                      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| Lorazepam     | 0.5-1mg PO/IV    | Sedation, delirium,  | No        |
|               | q6h PRN          | amnesia, respiratory |           |
| (Ativan)      |                  | depression           |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| **H1          |                  |                      |           |
| Antagonists** |                  |                      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| Promethazine  | 12.5 - 25mg PO   | Sedation, EPS (D2    | Yes       |
| (Phenergan)   | /PR /IV q6h      | antagonist also),    |           |
|               | (avoid IV use if | arrhythmias, blurry  |           |
|               | possible)        | vision               |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| Di            | 25-50mg PO/IV    | Sedation, delirium,  | Yes       |
| phenhydramine | q6h              | urinary retention,   |           |
| (Benadryl)    |                  | ileus                |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| Meclizine     | 12.5-25mg PO q6h | Sedation, dizziness, | Yes       |
|               |                  | falls, blurry vision |           |
| (Antivert)    |                  |                      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| **Antic       |                  |                      |           |
| holinergics** |                  |                      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| Scopolamine   | 1 mg patch q3day | Dry mouth, blurry    | No        |
|               |                  | vision, drowsiness   |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| **Gluc        |                  |                      |           |
| ocorticoids** |                  |                      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| Dexamethasone | 4-8mg PO/IV      | Hyperglycemia, fluid | No        |
|               | prior to chemo   | retention, delirium  |           |
|               | or XRT,          |                      |           |
|               | typically use    |                      |           |
|               | with other       |                      |           |
|               | agents           |                      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| **NK1         |                  |                      |           |
| Antagonists** |                  |                      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| Aprepitant    | Given prior      | Fatigue, neutropenia | No        |
|               | to/with chemo    |                      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| **CBD         |                  |                      |           |
| Agonists**    |                  |                      |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+
| Dronabinol    | 2.5-5mg BID      | Dizziness, increased | No        |
|               |                  | appetite,            |           |
|               |                  | Tachycardia,         |           |
|               |                  | hypotension          |           |
+---------------+------------------+----------------------+-----------+

Ostomy Complications -- AJ De Witte

Definition

-   Nomenclature: segment of the bowel used (sigmoid, colon, ileum),
    surgical construction (loop, end, reservoir), duration (temporary vs
    permanent)

-   Highest complication rates: loop ileostomies

-   Lowest complication rates: end ileostomies/colostomies

    Presentation/Management

-   Very Early Complications (days)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Operative technical issues (ie, LBO) - return to OR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Early Complications (\<3 months)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Suboptimal stoma site selection + high risk patient factors (ie,
    nutrition, age, tobacco use).

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stomal Necrosis

-   Stomal Bleeding

-   Stomal Retraction

-   Mucocutaneous Separation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Management: EGS/colorectal and ostomy team consult

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Late Complications (\>3 months)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gas

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diet (starch and soluble fiber) vs gas ingestion (drinking straws,
    chewing gum, smoking)

-   Management: dietary modifications, OTC meds, flatus filters if
    unresponsive

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dehydration/high ostomy output (\>1.5 L/day):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Common in loop ileostomy

-   Management: psyllium husk (1^st^ line), antimotility agents +/- IVF
    (2^nd^ line).

-   Additional management: octreotide, cholestyramine, tincture of
    opium.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Parastomal Hernia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   No action needed unless incarcerated/strangulated/bowel obstruction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stomal Prolapse

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Telescoping of the intestine out from the stoma with risk of
    intestinal edema, incarceration

    -   Uncomplicated prolapse: cool compresses +/- application of
        osmotic agent, followed by manual reduction + abdominal binder.

    -   Complicated prolapse: ischemia +/- bleeding, urgent EGS consult

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stomal Stenosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mild stenosis: diet (avoidance of insoluble fiber) +/- routine
    dilation.

-   Severe Stenosis: cramping, explosive output. Surgical correction.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mechanical Trauma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Routine peristomal hair trimming and plasticizing skin sealants with
    pouch removal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dermatitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Severely denuded skin, most common with ileostomy.

-   Management: barrier powder + removal of allergen,
    nystatin/miconazole powder (if fungal), topical steroids (refractory
    cases)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Granulomas

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Red, moist, elevated lesions (+/- bleeding) at the mucocutaneous
    border usually from retained extraneous material.

-   Management: removal of extraneous material + Silver nitrate.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Peristomal Pyoderma Gangrenosum (PPG)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Neutrophilic dermatosis, pathergy (avoid biopsy), seen in IBD

-   Management: mild (topical steroids vs tacrolimus, wound care);
    severe (systemic steroids +/- anti TNF, surgery)

Geriatrics

Editors: Mallory Bryant MD & Aisha Suara MD

Reviewed by: Rachael Petry MD

Functional Status

Background:

-   Functional status: Ability to perform activities necessary in daily
    life (ADL)

+---------------------+--------------------------+---------------------+
| **Basic ADL's**     | **Instrumental ADL's**   | **Advanced ADL's**  |
+---------------------+--------------------------+---------------------+
| [D]                 | [S]{.underline}hopping   | Fulfill societal,   |
| {.underline}ressing |                          | community and       |
|                     | [H                       | family roles        |
| [                   | ]{.underline}ousekeeping |                     |
| E]{.underline}ating | & laundry                | Participate in      |
|                     |                          | recreational tasks  |
| [A]{.underline      | [H]{.underline}andling   |                     |
| }mbulating/transfer | medications              |                     |
|                     |                          |                     |
| [T]{.underline}     | [A]{.underline}ccounting |                     |
| oileting/continence | (finances)               |                     |
|                     |                          |                     |
| [H                  | [F]{.underline}ood       |                     |
| ]{.underline}ygiene | preparation              |                     |
| (bathing)           |                          |                     |
|                     | [T]{.underline}elephone  |                     |
|                     |                          |                     |
|                     | [T]{                     |                     |
|                     | .underline}ransportation |                     |
|                     | (driving)                |                     |
+---------------------+--------------------------+---------------------+

Evaluation:

-   Functional decline is not normal with aging and warrants detailed
    physical, cognitive, and psychosocial evaluations

-   Suggested evaluation tools: Katz ADL scale, Lawton-Brody IADL scale,
    Get Up and Go Test, MMSE, Geriatric Depression Scale

-   Vulnerable Elders Scale-13 can identify community dwelling patients
    at risk of decline over 5 years

Dementia

Background:

+-----------------+------------------+---------------------------------+
| **Normal        | **Mild Cognitive | **Alzheimer's Dementia**        |
| Aging**         | Impairment**     |                                 |
|                 |                  | **(DSM V Diagnostic Crit.)**    |
+-----------------+------------------+---------------------------------+
| Mild decline in | Subjective       | Evidence of significant         |
| working memory  | complaint of     | cognitive decline from a        |
|                 | cognitive        | *previous level of performance  |
| More            | decline in at    | in one or more cognitive        |
| effort/time     | least one domain | domains*                        |
| needed to       |                  |                                 |
| recall new info | \+               | \+                              |
|                 |                  |                                 |
| New learning    | Cognitive        | Causes significant impairment   |
| slowed but well | decline is       | in social & occupation          |
| compensated by  | noticeable and   | functioning                     |
| lists,          | measurable       |                                 |
| calendars, etc. |                  | \+                              |
|                 | \+               |                                 |
| \+              |                  | Other medical & psychiatric     |
|                 | No impairment in | conditions, including delirium, |
| No impairment   | social &         | have been excluded              |
| in social &     | occupation       |                                 |
| occupation      | functioning      | \+                              |
| functioning     |                  |                                 |
|                 |                  | Insidious onset and gradual     |
|                 |                  | progression of impairment in at |
|                 |                  | least two cognitive domains     |
+-----------------+------------------+---------------------------------+
| **Cognitive     |                  |                                 |
| domains***:*    |                  |                                 |
| l               |                  |                                 |
| earning/memory, |                  |                                 |
| language,       |                  |                                 |
| executive       |                  |                                 |
| function,       |                  |                                 |
| complex         |                  |                                 |
| attention,      |                  |                                 |
| perceptual      |                  |                                 |
| motor, social   |                  |                                 |
| cognition       |                  |                                 |
+-----------------+------------------+---------------------------------+

+-----------+------------+------------+-------------+-----------------+
|           | **A        | **Vascular | **Lewy Body | *               |
|           | lzheimer's | Dementia** | Dementia**  | *Frontotemporal |
|           | Disease**  |            |             | Dementia**      |
+-----------+------------+------------+-------------+-----------------+
| **Onset** | Gradual    | Sudden or  | Gradual     | Gradual (age \< |
|           |            | stepwise   |             | 60)             |
+-----------+------------+------------+-------------+-----------------+
| **        | Memory,    | Depends on | Memory,     | Executive       |
| Cognitive | language,  | location   | v           | dysfunction,    |
| Domains & | vi         | of         | isuospatial | personality     |
| S         | suospatial | ischemia   |             | changes,        |
| ymptoms** |            |            |             | disinhibition,  |
|           |            |            |             | language, +/-   |
|           |            |            |             | memory          |
+-----------+------------+------------+-------------+-----------------+
| **Motor   | Rare early | Correlates | P           | None            |
| S         |            | with       | arkinsonism |                 |
| ymptoms** | Apraxia    | ischemia   | (memory     |                 |
|           | later      |            | loss        |                 |
|           |            |            | typically   |                 |
|           |            |            | precedes)   |                 |
+-----------+------------+------------+-------------+-----------------+
| **Prog    | Gradual    | Gradual or | Gradual,    | Gradual, but    |
| ression** | (over 8-10 | stepwise   | but faster  | faster than     |
|           | years)     | with       | than        | Alzheimer's     |
|           |            | further    | Alzheimer's | disease         |
|           |            | ischemia   | disease     |                 |
+-----------+------------+------------+-------------+-----------------+
| **        | Possible   | Cortical   | Possible    | Atrophy in      |
| Imaging** | global     | or         | global      | frontal &       |
|           | atrophy    | s          | atrophy     | temporal lobes  |
|           |            | ubcortical |             |                 |
|           |            | on MRI     |             |                 |
+-----------+------------+------------+-------------+-----------------+

-   **Rare causes of dementia**: Parkinson disease dementia, posterior
    cortical atrophy, CJD, corticobasal degeneration, neurosyphilis,
    NPH, autoimmune dementias (eg, NMDA)

Evaluation:

-   MINI-COG: Screening test for cognitive impairment (highly sensitive)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Word Recall: Ask pt to remember three words (banana, sunrise,
    chair). Ask pt to repeat immediately

-   CDT: Ask pt to draw clock. After numbers are on the face, ask pt to
    "set hands to 10 past 11"

-   Correct is all numbers in right position AND hands pointing to the
    11 and the 2

-   Ask pt to recall the three words

![Diagram Description automatically
generated](media/image21.png){width="3.4090813648293965in"
height="1.5348239282589675in"}

MOCA: Montreal Cognitive Assessment:

-   Lengthier test of cognition (but highly specific for cognitive
    impairment)

-   Useful for detecting subtle deficits as in Mild Cognitive Impairment
    (MCI)

-   Training and Certification is mandatory for proper use.

-   Scores:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   18-25: Mild cognitive impairment

-   10-17: Moderate cognitive impairment

-   \<10: Severe cognitive impairment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Rule out reversible causes of dementia-like symptoms: DEMENTIA

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Drugs

-   Emotional (depression)

-   Metabolic (CHF, COPD, CKD, OSA)

-   Endocrine (hypothyroidism, hyperparathyroidism, hyponatremia)

-   Nutrition (B12 deficiency)

-   Trauma (chronic SDH)

-   Infection (RPR, HIV testing in at-risk patient groups)

-   Arterial (vascular- consider MRI brain)

-   Consider referral for Neuropsychiatric testing if diagnostic pattern
    unclear. Consider MRI brain with contrast if concerned for
    inflammatory or infectious causes.

Management:

-   Targeting Cognitive Impairment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cholinesterase Inhibitors: Donepezil, rivastigmine

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indicated for any stage of AD, PDD, LBD, Vascular Dementia (avoid in
    FTD)

-   SE: GI (nausea, diarrhea), bradycardia, orthostasis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NMDA antagonists: Memantine

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indicated in moderate to severe AD in combination with
    cholinesterase inhibitors

-   Fewer SE than cholinesterase inhibitors

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Targeting Behaviors

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   BPSD: Behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia

-   Non-pharmacologic management has the best evidence of effectiveness

-   treat underlying cause, hydration/nutrition, orient, mobilize,
    manage pain, environmental modification, eliminate devices, engage
    family, sensory restoration, sleep protocol

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Depression: Treat with antidepressants (SSRI's)- (citalopram 10mg or
    sertraline 25mg = starting doses)

    -   Sleep Disturbance: Mirtazapine (7.5 mg nightly) or Trazodone (25
        mg nightly)

    -   Agitation: SSRI (typically first line)- see above; mood
        stabilizers (manic-type behaviors)- Depakote 125mg q12 =
        starting dose (serum level 50-100 mcg/mL therapeutic)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider antipsychotics (black box warning increased risk of death
    for older adults with dementia-related psychosis) for behaviors that
    threaten safety of patient or staff and use lowest dose possible

-   See "Delirium" section in Psychiatry for inpatient management
    recommendations

Falls

Background:

-   Screen annually for falls in the past year

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   History of fall is a strong risk factor for future falls

-   Recommended History Screening Tool: CDC STEADI Algorithm

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Physical Exam Screening Tools:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If potentially unstable injuries (new spine fracture or lower
    extremity fracture): Clarify weightbearing status with surgical
    teams

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If no potentially unstable injuries, attempt to get the patient out
    of bed

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If lying down, have them lift each leg off the bed

-   If they can do this, ask them to sit up on side of bed

-   If they can do this, ask them to stand

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If they can do this without assistance, then observe them walk

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The Timed "up and Go" Test (TUG) tool for fall risk

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Have the patient rise from sitting in a chair, walk 10 feet forward,
    turn around, walk back to chair, and sit down

-   Patients who require 12 or more seconds are at increased risk for
    falls

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Med Rec:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Antipsychotics, antidepressants, anticholinergics, anxiolytics,
    sedatives/hypnotics, anti-hypertensives, antiarrhythmics, steroids,
    statins all can increase risk of falls

Management:

-   Rule out other causes: Cardiac, Neurologic, Infectious

-   Check Vitamin D levels (goal \> 30) and supplement (at least
    800-1000 IU daily) if at increased fall risk

-   Assess visual acuity (e.g. expedite cataract surgery)

-   Hearing assessment (audiology screen)

-   Consult Inpatient PT/OT and refer for HH PT/OT for home safety
    evaluation at discharge

-   Recommend non-skid shoes with a backing (sneaker)

-   Modify extrinsic risk factors for falls: removal of fall hazards,
    placement of handrails

-   Referral to Exercise programs: At VUMC = Dayani Center "Ambulatory
    Referral to Medical Fitness" outpatient order

Frailty and Malnutrition

Frailty Background:

-   Syndrome of physiological decline in late life, characterized by
    marked vulnerability to adverse health outcomes

    Evaluation:

-   FRAIL Scale Identifies frailty in community dwelling elders (1 -2 =
    prefrail; 3 or more = frail)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fatigue: are you Fatigued more often than not?

-   Resistance: are you able to climb a flight of stairs?

-   Aerobic: are you bale to walk a block?

-   Illness: Do you have more than five illnesses?

-   Loss: Have you lost more than 5% of weight in 6 months?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consult to nutrition for recommendations on directed supplementation

-   Order Vitamin D and B-12 Levels.

    Management:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Screen for and treat depression.

-   Prevention of/extra support after stressors (consider HiRISE clinic
    referral if elective surgery planned)

-   Adapt interventions to the individual based on comprehensive
    geriatric assessment- incorporating de-escalations of care for
    patients with more advanced frailty

-   Exercise programs with additional physical and occupational therapy
    input if indicated.

-   Referral to Nutrition if concern for malnutrition (see below)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Malnutrition (Needs to meet two or more of following criteria):

-   Insufficient calorie intake

-   Weight loss

-   Loss of muscle mass

-   Loss of subcutaneous fat

-   Localized fluid accumulation that may mask weight loss

-   Diminished functional status as measured in handgrip strength

-   Reversible causes of malnutrition:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Food security (poverty), dental status (dentition, gum health),
    dietary restrictions, food-related functional status (shop, prepare
    meals, feed self), depression, dementia, alcoholism, swallowing
    ability

Evaluation:

-   Assess for depression

-   Screening with Mini Nutritional Assessment (good sensitivity and
    specificity)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Order: CBC, CMP, TSH

-   Screen for Common Nutritional deficiencies: B12, folate, vitamin D

-   Consider CT C/A/P depending on history

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Refeeding: K, Phos, Mg BID until stable and no longer having to
    replete

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Refer to Nutritionist

Management

-   Manage reversible causes of malnutrition as above

-   Medications: consider Remeron (7.5 mg nightly). Avoid Megace (NNH =
    23 for death)

-   Liberalize dietary restrictions

-   Nutritional Supplementation

    ![A qr code on a white background Description automatically
    generated](media/image22.png){width="1.1722222222222223in"
    height="1.4333333333333333in"}

Medication Management

Polypharmacy is defined as the regular use of five or more medications.
It increases the risk of adverse drug effects, drug-drug interactions,
or prescribing cascades whereby additional drugs are prescribed to treat
other drugs' adverse events. Therefore, it is important to evaluate for
polypharmacy by performing a medication reconciliation on admission,
during transitions of care, and every clinic visit to determine if
deprescribing is necessary.

-   Pharmacologic considerations for older adults

-   Pharmacokinetic (PK): Decreased hepatic and renal clearance.
    Reduction in first pass metabolism. Drug distribution changes due to
    decreased TBW and lean body mass resulting in relative increase in
    fat.

-   Pharmacodynamic (PD): Exaggerated responses to pharmacologic therapy
    (therapeutic and adverse effects).

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mantra for prescribing = "start low and go slow"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Be aware of Prescribing Cascades:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NSAIDs can lead to gastritis, which can lead to prescription of PPI,
    which can lead to B12 deficiency and prescription of vitamins

-   Amlodipine can cause lower extremity edema leading to a diuretic
    prescription that can then lead to urinary incontinence and
    prescription of oxybutynin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Common PIMs (Potentially Inappropriate Meds) see Beer's Criteria®
    (QR code below for full consideration)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Anticholinergics (e.g. antispasmodics, muscle relaxants, TCAs,
    antihistamines): confusion, dry mouth, constipation.

-   Anticholinergic burden calculator: <https://www.acbcalc.com/>

-   Aspirin: Would only consider for secondary prevention

-   Benzodiazepines: increased risk of clinical dependence, falls,
    fractures, and delirium

-   Proton pump inhibitors: Avoid \>8 weeks unless high risk patient due
    to risk of C.diff, PNA, and fractures

-   Sulfonylureas: higher risk of all-cause mortality, cardiovascular
    events, and hypoglycemia compared to other oral hypoglycemic agents

-   Nitrofurantoin: Avoid with CrCl \<30 mL/min. Potential for pulmonary
    toxicity, hepatotoxicity, and peripheral neuropathy

    Tips for med adherence:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Assess current system for medication management

-   Determine if medication timing is optimal for individual patient
    (e.g. diuretic dosing at night can increase nocturia but during day
    can risk incontinence/frequency)

-   If organization is a barrier provide pillboxes or arrange blister
    packs for meds

Recommended Tools: [deprescribing.org]{.underline} (App available);
[medstopper.com]{.underline}

![](media/image23.png){width="0.9683103674540683in"
height="1.0793274278215224in"}

Urinary Incontinence and Foleys

+----------+-------------------------------+--------------------------+
| **Types  | **Mechanism**                 | **Associated Symptoms**  |
| of UI**  |                               |                          |
+----------+-------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Stress   | Incompetent urethral          | UI with physical         |
|          | sphincter                     | exertion                 |
|          |                               |                          |
|          | (e.g. post-prostatectomy,     | (cough, laughter,        |
|          | post childbirth)              | sneeze)                  |
+----------+-------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Urge     | ↑ bladder contraction from    | Frequency, nocturia,     |
|          | detrusor instability          | sudden urge              |
|          |                               |                          |
|          | (e.g. infection, stone, T2DM, |                          |
|          | caffeine, meds, BPH           |                          |
+----------+-------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Overflow | ↓ contractility/outlet        | Hesitancy, weak stream,  |
|          | obstruction (e.g. BPH,        | sense of incomplete      |
|          | anticholinergic medications,  | emptying                 |
|          | T2DM, pelvic trauma, spinal   |                          |
|          | cord disease, MS, polio)      |                          |
+----------+-------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Fu       | Physical, emotional, or       | Depression, pain,        |
| nctional | cognitive disability          | evidence of physical,    |
|          |                               | sensory, or cognitive    |
|          |                               | impairment               |
+----------+-------------------------------+--------------------------+

Evaluation:

-   Perform a thorough Medication Reconciliation/History:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Alcohol, α-Adrenergic agonists, α-Adrenergic blockers, ACE
    inhibitors, Anticholinergics, Antipsychotics, Calcium channel
    blockers, oral estrogen, GABAergic agents, NSAID's, narcotics

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Order Hemoglobin A1C, Electrolytes (particularly calcium), UA

-   Rule out retention using PVR

-   Pelvic exam to rule out prolapse

-   Rectal exam to rule out fecal impaction

Management:

-   Skin care for urinary incontinence:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Barrier creams: petroleum, zinc oxide

-   Diapers only when up out of bed

-   Chucks while in bed (do not hold moisture up close to the skin like
    diapers do)

-   Offer toileting Q1-2hours

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indications for a foley:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Inability to void

-   Need for accurate UOP monitoring when patient unable to comply

-   Urinary Incontinence AND open sacral or perineal wound

-   Perioperative Use

-   Comfort care at end of life

TOC/Disposition Urinary Incontinence and Foleys

Background:

-   Post-Acute Care Settings

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   **[ALF]{.underline}**: private pay, up to 2 ADL assist needs, 3
    meals per day, medication administration may cost extra (typically
    lay person/med tech). No routine vitals, nursing assessments, labs,
    medical care on site

-   **[Home health]{.underline}**: Medicare beneficiaries qualify for
    skilled home health services (nursing, PT, speech/language therapy)
    if they are homebound, have a skilled need, and are certified by a
    clinician via face to face visit within 90 days before the start of
    care or 30 days after the start of care

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   [Homebound]{.underline}: a person must rarely leave the home or
    require the assistance of another person, an assistive device, or
    special transportation to be able to leave the home. A homebound
    person may still leave the home for medical treatment or
    appointments, for religious services, or for brief, rare, nonmedical
    reasons. Under Medicare guidelines, individuals may be temporarily
    homebound (recovering from hospitalization) or permanently
    homebound.

-   [Skilled need]{.underline}: care that can only be performed by, or
    under supervision of, a nurse, PT, or SLP. Once this need is
    established, additional skilled in-home services may be provided
    such as OT or SW

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \<8 hours per day and 28 or less hours each week

-   Medicare Part A and Medicare Part B full coverage for 30 day payment
    periods for 60 day plan of care.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   **[SNF]{.underline}**: Medicare Part A (Traditional) pays 100 days
    (100% first 20 days, Day 21-100 requires additional co-pay
    \[!\$204/day as of 2024\] per benefit period)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Who qualifies?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Needs 3 qualifying midnights inpatient status (unless a part of an
    ACO, then waiver may be possible)

-   Examples of medical/skilled nursing needs:

    -   IV meds at least daily

    -   Wound care at least daily

    -   Any TPN/enteral feeds

    -   Ostomy care

    -   Device/drain management

    -   Acute management of exacerbation of chronic disease

    -   New use of oxygen or RT treatments

    -   Examples of skilled therapy needs:

    -   needs for/ability to do 1 hour therapy 5 days per week

    -   Gait evaluation

    -   Transfer training

    -   ADL training

    -   Speech/swallow restoration

    -   Cognitive training

    -   Therapeutic treatment to ensure patient safety

-   What should patients expect?

    -   Will see MD \*typically\* within 72 business hours and 1-2
        times/14 days

    -   Physician on call 24/7 for emergencies

    -   Day-to-day care provided by nurses and APRN

    -   Nurse patient ratio up to 1:20, CNA ratio up to 1:8

    -   RN in building for 8 hours 7 days per week (LPNs providing
        around the clock care), nurse ratios are regulated otherwise
        based on "nursing hours per resident day" and acuity)

    -   RT only in house 24/7 in facilities with patients on vent/trach

    -   Therapy minimum: 1 hour 5 times per week

    -   Medications can take up to 12 hours to be delivered upon patient
        arrival to SNF at the med deliver portion

    -   Medications are delivered once daily (often in pillpacks)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Inpatient Rehab: Medicare Part A covers 90 days of
    hospitalization---IPR days count as inpatient hospital days (100%
    first 60 days, Day 61-90 covered by daily co-pay, 91+days daily
    copay for up to 60 lifetime reserve days)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Who Qualifies?

    -   Does NOT need 3 qualifying midnights inpatient status

    -   What should patients expect?

    -   Will see PM&R physician daily

    -   24/7 nursing care

    -   3 hours of therapy 5 days a week (PT, OT, SLP, or a combination)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   LTAC: Medicare Part A covers 90 days (100% first 90 days but takes
    away from inpatient hospital days like IPR, can also use 60 lifetime
    reserve days)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Functions like a hospital for patients who no longer need inpatient
    diagnostics

-   Commonly used for ventilator weaning, new trachs, complex wound care

-   What should patients expect?

    -   Physician sees daily

    -   RT

    -   24/7 nursing

Transitions of Care:

-   One in three older adults is readmitted within 30 days of discharge,
    and at least 25% of these are preventable.

-   Helping with a smooth transition:

-   Medication Reconciliation (if discharging to SNF, "no print"
    non-opioid prescriptions---SNF will fill all needed meds at
    discharge)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stop dates for short term scripts

-   Explain reasoning behind medication changes

-   Intended Taper/Ramp plans

-   Patches/topicals: date last applied and where

-   Send 3 days of all controlled substances electronically (or paper
    scripts at VA)

-   Monitoring new/resuming home meds

    -   Ideally, resume home meds at least one day prior to discharge

    -   Why were they held? When to restart?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Any labs/vitals that should be monitored when restarting?

    -   If oncology treatments on hold, is there plan for a follow-up?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Discharge orders

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Weight bearing restrictions/post-surgical precautions

-   Wound care instructions

-   Date of placement of lines/catheters/drains/tubes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Follow-up plans

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   What appointments need to be made?

-   SNF SW can help!

-   Port flushes, chemo infusions, dialysis, etc.

-   PCP follow-up after SNF discharge

-   Post-procedure follow-up?

-   Staple/suture removal dates

-   Wound care last done/next change date

-   Catheters, who is overseeing voiding trial?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   VUMC "Transition of Care to Nursing Home" consult (no age
    restrictions!)

-   Geriatrics team NP calls and gives warm handoff to SNF provider
    (Available Monday-Friday 8am-5pm; Pager 14009)

Medicare (including AWV tips)

Eligibility:

-   adults aged 65 years or older who have paid a combined 10 years of
    taxes in the USA (some exceptions are for those who are disabled (on
    SSDI, have ESRD, or ALS))

+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| **Medicare**    | **Coverage**                                       |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Part A ("After  | Inpatient care, subacute SNF, skilled home health  |
| the Hospital")  | care (after hospitalization), hospice care         |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | Blood transfusions                                 |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Part B ("Before | Physician services, outpatient care, ambulance     |
| the Hospital")  | services, advance care planning, behavioral health |
|                 | integration services, skilled home health (not     |
|                 | after hospitalization), telemedicine, preventative |
|                 | care                                               |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | DME, labs, diagnostic tests, flu/pneumonia         |
|                 | vaccines, immunosuppression for organ transplants, |
|                 | chemo)                                             |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Part C          | Part A and B services delivered through private    |
| (Medicare       | managed care plans                                 |
| Advantage)      |                                                    |
|                 | Could include additional services such as vision,  |
|                 | dental, wellness                                   |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | Prescription drug coverage may be included         |
|                 |                                                    |
|                 | Delivered through MA plans (eg, HMOs most common)  |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+
| Part D (Drug    | Prescription drug benefit                          |
| coverage)       |                                                    |
|                 | Includes many recommended vaccines (e.g., Zoster,  |
|                 | Tdap)                                              |
+-----------------+----------------------------------------------------+

-   Annual Well Visit

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Must be at least 12 months after last AWV

-   Coding: Initial (G0438) and Subsequent (G0439)

-   Template: .MEDICAREAWV2021

-   Health Risk Assessment (included in intake)

-   Functional ability and level of safety (included in intake)

-   Personalized prevention plan services (use dot phrase .pppsmedicare
    in patient instructions)

Immunizations / Screening in Older Adults

Immunizations in Adults 65+ (AGS Guide) - Strongly Recommended

+--------------+--------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Vaccine**  | **Schedule**       | **Talking Points**               |
+--------------+--------------------+----------------------------------+
| COVID-19     | Yearly             | Effective against severe         |
|              |                    | illness, hospitalization, and    |
|              |                    | death                            |
+--------------+--------------------+----------------------------------+
| Influenza    | Yearly             | Effective against death and      |
|              |                    | hospitalization                  |
+--------------+--------------------+----------------------------------+
| Pneumococcal | one dose of PCV20  | Pneumococcal disease most often  |
|              | (conjugate) OR     | occurs in older adults and in    |
|              |                    | those with predisposing          |
|              | PCV15 (conjugate)  | conditions and may occur in the  |
|              | followed by PPSV23 | lungs, brain, or blood. PCV20    |
|              | (polysaccharide)   | protects against more types of   |
|              | one year later     | pneumococcal bacteria than PCV13 |
+--------------+--------------------+----------------------------------+
| Recombinant  | Two doses (second  | Reduces risk of herpes zoster by |
| Zoster       | dose administered  | over 90% and postherpetic        |
|              | 2-6 months after   | neuralgia by 85%                 |
|              | the first)         |                                  |
+--------------+--------------------+----------------------------------+
| RSV          | Yearly             | Benefits: reduced outpatient RSV |
|              |                    | lower respiratory tract disease  |
|              |                    | by 82-89% in one season          |
|              |                    |                                  |
|              |                    | Harms: Serious neurological      |
|              |                    | inflammatory events in a handful |
|              |                    | of study participants            |
|              |                    |                                  |
|              |                    | Unknowns: insufficient data on   |
|              |                    | efficacy and safety in people 75 |
|              |                    | years or older, persons who are  |
|              |                    | frail, and persons who reside in |
|              |                    | long term care facilities.       |
|              |                    | Vaccines have not shown to       |
|              |                    | prevent hospitalizations in      |
|              |                    | older adults                     |
+--------------+--------------------+----------------------------------+
| Tdap         | Every 10 years     | recommended that all adults over |
|              |                    | age 65 get Tdap to help reduce   |
|              |                    | spread of whooping cough to      |
|              |                    | others, such as grandchildren    |
+--------------+--------------------+----------------------------------+

Cancer Screenings in Adults 65+ (AGS Guide)

-   Consider a patient's remaining life expectancy, comorbidities, risk
    of disease, preferences, cognitive and functional status when
    deciding which preventative measures to offer.

-   Cancer screenings below are not recommended for older adults with at
    least moderate dementia or those near the end of life

-   Older adults are generally open to conversations about stopping
    cancer screenings, especially when coming from a physician whom they
    trust.

-   Work by Nancy L. Schoenborn recommends framing these conversations
    around age, health status, and helping people live longer but showed
    discussing life expectancy in this context can be controversial.

-   Most compelling reason to stop screening: "this test would not help
    you live longer" instead of "you may not live long enough to benefit
    from this test"

-   UCSF Time to Benefit Calculator can help determine which
    interventions could potentially benefit or harm your patient\
    \
    Resource: UCSF ePrognonsis Score
    <https://eprognosis.ucsf.edu/time_to_benefit.php>

+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| **Screening**                   | **Cessation Guidance**             |
+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Mammogram (every 2 years)\*     | Consider at age 75                 |
+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Pap Smear\*                     | Stop at age 65                     |
+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Colon Cancer (yearly for fecal  | Shared decision-making ages 76-85  |
| occult blood test or every 10   |                                    |
| years with colonoscopy)\*       | Stop at age 86                     |
+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Lung Cancer (annually in those  | Stop at age 75-80                  |
| at risk)                        |                                    |
+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+

\*Not recommended for persons with \< 10 years remaining life expectancy

Other Screenings in Adults 65+ who are NOT at the end of life (AGS
Guide)

-   DEXA screening: at least once after age 65 in women or age 60 if
    high risk

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider if not done previously and life expectancy 5 to \< 10 years

-   TTB \~ 13 months so would consider in those with life expectancy \>
    2 years \*(difference from AGS guide)

-   Not recommended for persons with moderate dementia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Blood glucose: screen if patient likely to benefit; consider
    stopping at age 70

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Not recommended for persons with \< 10 years remaining life
    expectancy or moderate dementia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cholesterol: Screen those with additional risk factors (smoking, DM,
    HTN, 10 year CVD event risk \>10%) up to age 75

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider if life expectancy 5 to \< 10 years

-   Not recommended for persons with moderate dementia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ultrasonography for AAA: once for men 65-75 who ever smoked, can
    consider in men who never smoked

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider if life expectancy 5 to \< 10 years

-   Not recommended for persons with moderate dementia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   HIV: consider for those at high risk

-   Hepatitis B: consider for those at high risks

-   Hepatitis C: once for those born 1945-1965

Home Safety

**Elder Abuse/Neglect/Exploitation**

Background:

-   Affects up to 10% of community dwelling older adults and over 20% of
    older adults living in nursing homes

-   Only 1 in 24 cases are reported

-   Adult Protective Services (APS) investigates reports and will make
    appropriate referrals to resources within the community to help keep
    the individual in a safe environment. APS helps adults (18 and
    older) who are unable to care for themselves due to physical or
    mental impairment or advanced age (cannot manage own resources,
    carry out ADLs, protect themselves from neglect (including
    self-neglect), avoid abusive situations without assistance from
    others)

-   APS is not a police force and has 72 hours or more before beginning
    an investigation. If APS is concerned a crime has occurred, they
    will contact police

-   If concern for a patient\'s immediate safety, consider contacting
    local police department

Evaluation:

-   Recognize the signs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Physical abuse:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   bruising (especially on torso or head)

-   frequent injuries ("accidents")

-   signs of being restrained (marks on wrist)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Emotional abuse:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   isolation of vulnerable adult or refusal to allow visits with
    vulnerable adult alone

-   threatening, belittling, or controlling behavior by caregiver

-   Behavior that mimics dementia (rocking, sucking, mumbling)

-   Outbursts or extreme anger

-   Punishments like silent treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sexual abuse:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Frequent GU irritation or infections

-   Indication of bruising to genitals, upper torso, or upper thighs

-   Vulnerable adult indicates discomfort with caregiver while bathing,
    dressing, or toileting

-   Vulnerable adult has little or no privacy for bathing or dressing
    which bothers him or her

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Neglect (**[including self neglect]{.underline}**) - most common APS
    referral

    -   Unusual weight loss, malnutrition, dehydration

    -   Untreated physical problems (bed sores)

    -   Unsanitary living conditions (bed bugs, soiled bedding, clothes)

    -   Being left un-bathed

    -   Unsuitable clothing for weather

    -   Unsafe living conditions (no heat or running water, faulty
        electrical wiring, other fire hazards)

-   Financial exploitation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sudden changes in vulnerable adult's financial condition

-   Financial activity vulnerable adult couldn't have done

-   No food in home, utilities cut off, home not maintained

Management:

-   Legal obligation to notify APS (1-888-277-8366) or
    <https://reportadultabuse.dhs.tn.gov>

Driving Cessation

Background:

-   Driving is an important but complex IADL

-   Motor vehicle injuries are the leading cause of injury-related
    deaths among those 65-74 years old (second to falls in adults 75-84
    years old)

-   Some states require mandatory reporting of dementia diagnosis to DMV
    (Tennessee does not!)

    Evaluation:

-   When to screen for red flags ([age alone is not a red
    flag]{.underline}) to prompt assessment of driving safety

-   New diagnosis or change occurs in any condition that has been
    associated with impaired driving

-   New medication prescribed or dose of current medication is changed

-   Change in functional abilities is reported

-   Part of Annual Wellness Visit

-   Following transition of care (acute care to subacute care or home,
    home to ALF, etc)

    Management:

-   Nashville OT Driving Safety Evaluation Options

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   "Driving Solutions of Tennessee\" 615-806-0012

-   Refer to Pi Beta Phi

-   If no longer able to drive, consult social work for assistance with
    transportation to appointments

Hematology/Oncology

Editor: Thomas Gracie, MD, Matthew Lu, MD, Alexis Froehlich, MD

Reviewed by Rajiv Agarwal, MD, Vivek Patel, MD

Anemia -- Margaret Wheless

**\
First establish acuity:** bleed or consumptive process vs slow onset
anemia

-Check vitals for hypotension, tachycardia.

-Check Hgb trend from prior if available.

-Examine patient for pallor, rapid onset fatigue, AMS, feeble pulses and
any signs of bleeding.

-Consider risk factors such as recent procedure, blood thinner use,
falls, new medications.

-STAT repeat CBC along with haptoglobin, LDH, HFP(bilirubin) to rule out
hemolysis

-If no sx/signs of acute bleeding, move onto general anemia eval below.

-Note: CBC does not accurately reflect blood loss in acute rapid
bleeding scenarios so do not be falsely reassured by normal hematocrit
in GI bleeds/trauma patients.

Presentation

-   Symptoms: fatigue/malaise, dyspnea on exertion, angina (if history
    of CAD)

-   Signs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pallor, tachycardia, orthostatic hypotension, purpura, glossitis,
    koilonychia (in IDA)

-   Jaundice (if hemolysis)

-   Splenomegaly: suggests extramedullary hematopoiesis or sequestration

-   Neurologic symptoms: suggests B12 deficiency

Evaluation

-   CBC w/diff, reticulocyte count, peripheral blood smear, iron studies
    (TIBC, ferritin)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Reticulocyte index (RI) \> 2%: blood loss vs hemolysis; see below

-   Hemolysis labs: Bilirubin, LDH, haptoglobin

-   RI \< 2%: hypoproliferative 🡪stratify based on RBC size

-   Microcytic (\<80) vs. Normocytic (80-100) vs. Macrocytic (\>100)

Reticulocyte Index \> 2%

Background

-   Etiology: consumption vs. blood loss

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Loss: acute bleed vs iatrogenic from labs

-   Hemolysis: microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (MAHA), autoimmune
    hemolytic anemia (AIHA), intrinsic RBC defects

Evaluation

-   LDH, ↑ indirect bilirubin, ↓ haptoglobin, PT/PTT

-   Note: haptoglobin can be low in cirrhosis (made by liver), recently
    transfused blood, large hematoma

-   Peripheral blood smear: evaluated for schistocytes, bite cells, spur
    cells, spherocytes, etc.

-   Direct antiglobulin test (DAT) to evaluate for autoimmune hemolytic
    anemia

Extrinsic RBC causes

-   If schistocytes ± thrombocytopenia = MAHA: TTP, other TMA syndromes
    (HUS, drug-induced, complement-mediated), DIC, HELLP, mechanical
    valves, malignant HTN, cocaine, scleroderma renal crisis

-   If DAT positive = AIHA

-   Consider cold agglutinin titer

Intrinsic RBC causes

-   Sickle cell disease: chronic hemolysis + splenic sequestration
    crisis where RI is↑ vs aplastic crisis where RI is↓ (see sickle cell
    section)

-   Hereditary spherocytosis

-   Hereditary elliptocytosis

-   Severe B12 deficiency

-   Spur cell anemia (found in advanced cirrhosis)

-   PNH

-   G6PD: bite cells, Heinz bodies

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Usually precipitated by drugs: nitrofurantoin, dapsone,
    sulfonamides, rasburicase,\
    primaquine

Management

-   MAHA

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   DIC: sepsis, malignancy, pregnancy (See "Disseminated Intravascular
    Coagulation" section)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Treat underlying cause

-   If active bleeding: FFP, cryoprecipitate (to keep fibrinogen\>100),
    and platelets

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TTP: Order ADAMTS13 (prior to plasma transfusion or exchange).

    -   If concern for TTP you should immediately consult Heme and
        Nephrology

-   HUS: + shiga toxin, AKI, diarrhea

    -   IVF, antibiotics only to treat extra-renal disease, transfusion
        as necessary

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   AIHA:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cold (rare): IgM binds at temp \<37

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Caused by lymphoproliferative disorder (Waldenstrom's), mycoplasma,
    EBV, HIV

-   Consult Heme. Treat underlying condition. Consider rituximab
    (steroids ineffective)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Warm: IgG

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Idiopathic or associated with lymphoma, SLE, drugs, babesiosis, HIV

-   Can use steroids, IVIG, rituximab

RBC Size Framework

Normocytic anemia: MCV 80-100

-   Etiologies:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Anemia of inflammation (formerly chronic disease): (may also be
    microcytic)

-   Anemia of CKD: low Erythropoietin (EPO) levels

-   Endocrine disease (hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency):
    ↓metabolic demand/O2 requirement

-   Mixed macrocytic/microcytic disease may have a normal MCV: look for
    ↑RDW

-   Pure red cell aplasia: associated with destructive Ab (CLL, thymoma,
    parvovirus, autoimmune)

-   Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH)

-   Splenic sequestration

-   Bone marrow failure or infiltration (typically will see
    pancytopenia)

-   Vitamin C deficiency, copper deficiency

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bone marrow biopsy may be indicated if no identifiable cause or
    anemia is associated with other cytopenia's

Microcytic anemia: MCV \<80 (mnemonic: SALTI)

-   Sideroblastic, Anemia of chronic disease, Lead poisoning,
    Thalassemia and Iron-deficiency

+------------+------------------+-----------------+--------------------+
| Disease    | Etiology         | Evaluation      | Considerations     |
+============+==================+=================+====================+
| Sid        | MDS              | Social hx, TB,  | In clinical        |
| eroblastic |                  | consider Lead   | practice this is   |
|            | Idiopathic       | level           | usually acquired;  |
|            |                  |                 | either due to      |
|            | EtoH, Lead,      | Fe: ↑↑          | alcohol (can       |
|            | Isoniazid        |                 | resolved with      |
|            |                  | Ferritin: ↑ to  | cessation) or      |
|            | Cu deficiency    | nL              | primary bone       |
|            |                  |                 | marrow disorder    |
|            |                  | TIBC: nL        | (e.g. MDS-RARS)    |
|            |                  |                 |                    |
|            |                  | Smear:          |                    |
|            |                  | basophilic      |                    |
|            |                  | stippling       |                    |
|            |                  |                 |                    |
|            |                  | BMBx: ringed    |                    |
|            |                  | sideroblasts    |                    |
+------------+------------------+-----------------+--------------------+
| Anemia of  | Chronic          | Fe/TIBC \>18%   | Treat underlying   |
| In         | inflammation,    |                 | disease            |
| flammation | malignancy, HIV, | Fe: ↓↓          |                    |
| (formerly  | autoimmune dz,   |                 | Replete Fe if      |
| chronic    | heart failure,   | Ferritin: ↑↑    | ferritin \<100 or  |
| disease)   | etc.             |                 | TIBC \<20%         |
|            |                  | TIBC: ↓↓        |                    |
|            |                  |                 | EPO if Hgb \<10    |
|            |                  |                 | and serum EPO \<10 |
+------------+------------------+-----------------+--------------------+
| T          | ↓ synthesis of α | Mentzer's       | α thal more common |
| halassemia | or β chains      | index: MCV/RBC  | in Asian/African   |
|            | leads to ↓       | \<13 =          | descent            |
|            | erythropoiesis   | thalassemia     |                    |
|            | and ↑ hemolysis  |                 | β thal common in   |
|            |                  | Normal Fe       | Mediterranean      |
|            | Family Hx of     | studies; can    | descent            |
|            | anemia           | mimic           |                    |
|            |                  | microcytic      | Tx: transfusions,  |
|            |                  | anemia and Fe   | folate, Fe         |
|            |                  | overload from   | chelator depending |
|            |                  | transfusions    | on severity        |
|            |                  |                 |                    |
|            |                  | Diagnosis: Hb   |                    |
|            |                  | electrophoresis |                    |
|            |                  | (α will be      |                    |
|            |                  | normal)         |                    |
+------------+------------------+-----------------+--------------------+
| Iron (Fe)  | Chronic          | Fe/TIBC \<18%   | Oral Fe: 6wks to   |
| deficiency | bleeding: colon  |                 | correct anemia,    |
|            | cancer, heavy    | Fe:↓↓ TIBC:↑ nl | 6mo to replete     |
|            | menstrual        | to ↑            | stores; dose every |
|            | periods,         |                 | other day (↑       |
|            | cirrhosis        | Ferritin: \<    | absorption w/ ↓ GI |
|            | (portal          | 100             | side effects); add |
|            | gastropathy)     |                 | Vit C for ↑        |
|            |                  | Mentzer's       | absorption         |
|            | Supply:          | index: \>13     |                    |
|            | malnutrition,    |                 | If can't tolerate  |
|            | Crohn's dz,      | Consider celiac | PO consider IV Fe  |
|            | Celiac dz,       | testing based   | (Avoid when        |
|            | subtotal         | on clinical     | bacteremic)        |
|            | gastrectomy,     | suspicion       |                    |
|            | atrophic         |                 | HFrEF: IV Fe if    |
|            | gastritis        | Investigate for | ferritin \<100 OR  |
|            |                  | GIB or source   | 100-300 w/ Fe sat  |
|            | Demand:          | of blood loss   | \<20%              |
|            | pregnancy        |                 |                    |
+------------+------------------+-----------------+--------------------+

Macrocytic Anemia: MCV \>100

-   Non-megaloblastic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ETOH, liver disease, hypothyroidism, MDS

-   Medications that impair DNA synthesis: zidovudine, 5-FU,
    hydroxyurea, ara-C, AZT, MTX

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Megaloblastic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   B12 deficiency

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presentation: neurologic changes (subacute combined degeneration),
    paresthesias, ataxia, dementia (reversible with early treatment)

-   Etiology: malnutrition (alcoholics, vegan), pernicious anemia,
    gastrectomy, Crohn's disease, chronic pancreatitis, celiac disease

-   Diagnosis: ↓B12, ↑MMA, ↑homocysteine

-   Treatment: either monthly IM or PO B12 (1% paracellular absorption
    demonstrated to be sufficient for repletion)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Folate deficiency

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Etiology: malnutrition, decreased absorption (e.g. celiac disease),
    impaired metabolism (MTX, TMP), ↑requirement (hemolysis, malignancy,
    dialysis)

-   Diagnosis: ↓folate, ↑homocysteine, MMA will be normal

-   Treatment: PO folate 1-4mg daily

Neutropenia and Neutropenic Fever -- Jennifer Marvin-Peek

Background

-   Neutropenia: absolute neutrophil count (ANC) \< 1500

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Severe neutropenia: absolute neutrophil count (ANC) \<500 (Use
    manual count if available)

+------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Mechanism  | Causes           | Example (s)                          |
+============+==================+======================================+
| Neutrophil | Drug associated  | Cytotoxic or immunosuppressive       |
| production |                  | agents                               |
|            |                  |                                      |
|            |                  | Methimazole, PTU, colchicine         |
|            |                  |                                      |
|            |                  | Macrolides, bactrim, dapsone,        |
|            |                  | vancomycin                           |
|            |                  |                                      |
|            |                  | Amphotericin, acyclovir, ganciclovir |
|            |                  |                                      |
|            |                  | TCAs, clozapine, carbamazepine,      |
|            |                  | valproate                            |
|            |                  |                                      |
|            |                  | ACEI, digoxin, propranolol,          |
|            |                  | procainamide                         |
+------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+
|            | Radiation        |                                      |
|            | exposure         |                                      |
+------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+
|            | Malignancies     | Leukemias, MDS                       |
+------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+
|            | Infection        | Hepatitis, HIV, EBV, CMV             |
|            |                  |                                      |
|            |                  | Rickettsia, tularemia, typhoid, TB   |
+------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+
|            | Nutritional      | Vitamin B12, folate, copper          |
|            | deficiency       |                                      |
+------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+
|            | Other            | Aplastic anemia, benign ethnic       |
|            |                  | neutropenia                          |
+------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Redi       | Splenomegaly     | Margination and sequestration        |
| stribution |                  |                                      |
+------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Congenital | Genetics         | Benign ethnic neutropenia, familial  |
|            |                  | neutropenia                          |
+------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+
| Immune     | Autoimmune       | RA, SLE                              |
| d          |                  |                                      |
| estruction |                  |                                      |
+------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+
|            | Other            | Autoimmune neutropenia               |
+------------+------------------+--------------------------------------+

Management

-   If ANC \<500

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Check all lines/IVs for erythema and induration daily

-   Check mouth for mucositis, mouth care after meals and before bed

-   Assess for Neutropenic Fever and Complications -- see below

-   Evaluate for indications for prophylaxis -- see below

-   No evidence to support use of neutropenic diet

-   No digital rectal exams or enemas/suppositories (risk of bacterial
    translocation)

Neutropenic Fever

-   ANC \<500 and T\> 100.4 °F or 38.0 °C

-   Neutropenic pts are unable to mount an adequate immune response and
    can become critically ill very quickly

-   Do not wait for a temp re-check, you need to start antibiotics
    immediately

Evaluation

-   Chest X-ray

-   Two sets of blood cultures (one from PICC/port if present)

-   Urinalysis AND urine culture (not the reflex order set)

-   If diarrhea, get C. diff PCR

-   If abdominal pain, get CT A/P with IV contrast

Management

-   Empirically treat with cefepime

-   Indications for vancomycin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hemodynamically unstable

-   Severe mucositis

-   Focal consolidation on CXR

-   Erythema/induration around line

-   Concern for skin/soft tissue infection

-   GPCs in blood

-   Fever continues \>24h on cefepime

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Additional Coverage:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If abdominal pain/diarrhea: Flagyl 500mg q8h

-   Concern for C-diff: PO vancomycin 125mg q6h

-   Still fevering on cefepime at 72 hrs (differs by attending):
    meropenem

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fungal coverage: consider if risk factors (TPN) or persistent fevers
    (\>72hrs)

-   Micafungin 100 mg IV daily or voriconazole 200mg PO BID

Neutropenic Complications

Mucositis

-   Can range from mouth soreness to severe erosions preventing
    eating/drinking

-   Can become secondarily infected with Candida, HSV

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Management:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Routine oral care with a soft toothbrush to remove plaque

-   Oral rinses with saline and/or sodium bicarbonate

-   Magic mouthwash for symptomatic relief (or viscous lidocaine at the
    VA)

-   Typically recovers quickly when ANC \> 500

Neutropenic enterocolitis (typhlitis)

-   Life-threatening bacterial translocation due to breakdown of
    gut-mucosal barrier

-   Presentation: Abdominal pain + fever

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ± abdominal distension, nausea, vomiting, watery and/or bloody
    diarrhea

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diagnosis: CT A/P with contrast, consider C. diff PCR if diarrhea

-   Treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cefepime/Flagyl OR Zosyn

-   If no perforation/abscess on CT scan, typically continue until 14
    days after ANC recovers \>500 and abdominal pain resolves

-   Can change to cipro/flagyl once ANC \>500

-   If perforation/abscess: will need imaging to confirm resolution, and
    longer duration of abx

Neutropenic Prophylaxis

-   Used if ANC is expected to be \< 500 for \> 7 days

+-------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
|             | Most Common Regimens  | Alternatives                   |
+=============+=======================+================================+
| Bacterial   | levofloxacin 500mg    | cefdinir 300mg BID             |
|             | daily (renally dosed) |                                |
+-------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Viral       | valacyclovir 500mg    | acyclovir 400mg BID (renally   |
|             | BID                   | dosed)                         |
+-------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| Fungal      | fluconazole 400mg     | Posaconazole 300mg BID x2 days |
|             | daily                 | 🡪 300mg daily (AML induction   |
|             |                       | for aspergillus)               |
|             |                       |                                |
|             |                       | micafungin 50mg IV daily       |
+-------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+
| PJP (if     | inhaled pentamidine   | dapsone (check G6PD)           |
| steroids)   | 300mg qmonthly        |                                |
|             |                       | Avoid Bactrim (risk of         |
|             |                       | myelosuppression)              |
+-------------+-----------------------+--------------------------------+

Filgrastim (G-CSF -- Neupogen/Zarxio /Granix)

-   Induces bone marrow production of neutrophils

-   Dose: either 300mcg or 480mcg (rounded from 5 mcg/kg/day)

-   Common side effects: fatigue, nausea

-   PEG-filgrastim (Neulasta): long-acting version that is only given as
    an outpt

Thrombocytopenia -- Spencer Lessans

Background

-   Classified as either mild (100K-150K), moderate (50K-99K), or severe
    (\<50K)

-   Can be divided into different causes

    -   Decreased platelet production

        -   Decreased TPO: Cirrhosis

        -   Bone marrow suppression: sepsis, EtOH, infections (HIV,
            tick-borne \[RMSF, anaplasma, erhlichia\], leptospirosis,
            parvovirus aplastic crisis), certain drugs (vancomycin,
            linezolid, bactrim, valgancyclovir, immunosuppressive
            therapies, chemotherapies, allopurinol, colchicine)

        -   Bone marrow failure

            -   Infiltrative: malignancies (leukemia, lymphoma, myeloma,
                metastatic solid tumors), infections (TB, NTM, fungal
                infections), fibrosis (myelofibrosis)

            -   Aplastic anemia

        ```{=html}
        <!-- -->
        ```
        -   Nutrient deficiencies: Copper (primary or caused by elevated
            zinc levels), B12, folate

    -   Platelet destruction/consumption:

        -   Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP):

            -   Drug-induced (quinines, sulfonamides, beta-lactams,
                vancomycin, meropenem, valacyclovir, PPIs, H2 blockers,
                anti MTB therapy)

            -   Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia

            -   Infections (HIV, HBV, HCV, CMV, EBV, malaria, H. pylori)

            -   Autoimmune disorders (SLE, scleroderma)

            -   Thyroid disease

            -   Bleeding

            -   Idiopathic

        -   Thrombotic microangiopathies (TMAs)

            -   TTP (acquired, hereditary)

            -   HUS

            -   DIC (sepsis, APML, pancreatitis, transfusion reaction,
                HELLP)

            -   Drug-induced (Calcineurin inhibitors, gemcitabine,
                cocaine)

            -   Autoimmune (scleroderma renal crisis)

            -   Complement-mediated (atypical HUS)

            -   Catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome (APLS)

            -   Hypertensive emergency

    -   Sequestration: Hypersplenism or splenic sequestration (e.g.
        cirrhosis)

    -   Pseudothrombocytopenia: platelet clumping

    -   Dilutional: gestational thrombocytopenia

Presentation

-   Usually asymptomatic

-   Bleeding due to low platelet counts presents as petechiae

-   Some causes of thrombocytopenia have a paradoxical increased risk of
    thrombosis (HIT, DIC, TMA, VITT from the AstraZeneca or Johnson &
    Johnson COVID vaccines)

Evaluation

-   Repeat CBC w/ diff PLUS a peripheral smear

-   Citrated platelet count (to rule out pseudothrombocytopenia though a
    smear without clumping is sufficient to exclude this) and immature
    platelet fraction (IPF)

    -   IPF can help differentiate between decreased platelet production
        vs. increased platelet production (in setting of
        destruction/consumption)

-   Medication reconciliation to look for any offending drugs

-   TMA/DIC labs: Haptoglobin, LDH, LFTs, PT/PTT, fibrinogen, peripheral
    smear

-   Viral serologies: HIV, HBV, HCV, EBV, CMV, parvovirus (if clinically
    indicated)

-   Infectious work-up

    -   Sepsis: blood cultures

    -   Fungal work-up (if clinically indicated): 1,3-Beta-D-Glucan,
        aspergillus galactomannan, urine blasto Ag, urine and serum
        histo Ag, crypto Ag

    -   Tick-borne (if clinically indicated): RMSF, Ehrlichia, Anaplasma

    -   Leptospirosis (if clinically indicated)

    -   TB and/or NTM (if clinically indicated): AFB, interferon-Gamma
        release assay

-   Autoimmune work-up (if clinically indicated): ESR, CRP, ANA w/
    reflex, RF

-   Nutritional studies: B12, folate, copper, zinc

-   TSH to screen for thyroid disease

-   Abdominal U/S to look for splenomegaly (or review recent imaging)

-   Bone marrow biopsy (if clinically indicated): co-existing cytopenias
    raise suspicion for bone marrow involvement (particularly if present
    prior to admission)

-   HIT work-up: Calculate 4T score: if 4+, order HIT Ab ELISA. If (+),
    serotonin-release assay (SRA) will reflex for confirmation

Management:

-   Platelet transfusion indications

    -   CNS or ocular bleeding: \<100K

    -   Pt actively bleeding or plan for OR: \<50K

    -   Plan for central line, bronch, LP, diagnostic endoscopy, or bone
        marrow biopsy: \<20K

    -   Afebrile, hospitalized pts: \<10K

-   HIT management: Stop any heparin product and start argatroban.

-   Schistocytes on smear:

    -   Think TTP or DIC when there are schistocytes on smear and
        thrombocytopenia

    -   If DIC is excluded, consult Hematology to discuss sending
        ADAMTS13 and starting PLEX. A Vascath is needed for PLEX

Pancytopenia -- Matthew Lu

Background 

-   Pancytopenia is a decrease in all peripheral blood lineages (RBC,
    WBC, PLT). Many causes of pancytopenia can also cause bicytopenia,
    so bicytopenia is often worked up in a similar manner 

Framework for differential

-   Impaired production  

    -   Bone marrow infiltration/replacement  

        -   Hematologic malignancies (Acute leukemias, lymphoma, etc.),
            metastatic solid tumors, myelofibrosis, MDS 

        -   Infections: TB, NTM, Fungal  

    -   Bone marrow suppression/aplasia 

        -   Vitamin/nutritional deficiencies: B12, folate, copper (can
            be caused by zinc toxicity)

        -   Aplastic anemia (AA) 

        -   Infection: HIV, hepatitis, parvovirus B19, EBV, CMV,
            tick-borne

        -   Medications (see below) 

        -   Toxins: ethanol

        -   Sepsis 

-   Peripheral destruction  

    -   TMA syndromes: TTP, HUS, 

    -   Autoimmune hemolytic  

        -   Evan's syndrome (idiopathic or secondary) 

        -   Autoimmune disorders: SLE

        -   Myelo- or lymphoproliferative disorders: CLL, CML,
            multicentric Castleman's

    -   Infection: EBV, CMV, HIV, hep B, hep C

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sequestration (splenomegaly) 

-   Combined process: PNH (associated with AA), SLE, malignancies, HLH,
    Crohn's, infections

Evaluation 

-   HPI: B-symptoms, fatigue, dyspnea, infections, bleeding/bruising 

-   Medications

    -   NSAIDs, anti-epileptics, chemotherapy, antimicrobials/antivirals
        (Bactrim, valgancyclovir, linezolid, RIPE therapy),
        immunosuppression (MMF, azathoprine, tacrolimus), anti-gout
        (allopurinol, colchicine), anti-thyroid (methimazole) 

-   PMHx: autoimmune disease (SLE, RA, Scleroderma), radiation, gastric
    surgery, malabsorption (e.g. celiac, Crohn's), liver disease,
    malignancy, transplant 

-   Social Hx: EtOH use, malnutrition, occupational exposures, exposures
    to TB, leishmaniasis, or ticks  

-   Exam: lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, neuropathy, rashes,
    petechiae, stigmata of liver disease, cachexia, oral lesions 

-   Diagnostic studies 

    -   CBC w/ diff, peripheral smear, IPF, reticulocyte count 

    -   TMA/DIC labs: PT/PTT/Fibrinogen, CMP, LDH, haptoglobin, smear   

    -   Viral studies: hepatitis B/C, EBV, CMV, HIV, parvovirus B19 

    -   Infectious work up (as clinically indicated): non-invasive
        fungal, Quant-gold/AFB, Anaplasma/Erhlichia PCR, RMSF 

    -   Nutritional studies: B12, folate, copper, zinc, iron

    -   Abdominal ultrasound (for splenomegaly) 

    -   HLH (as clinically indicated): ESR/CRP, ferritin, triglycerides,
        soluble IL-2R, biopsy (liver or bone marrow) 

    -   Autoimmune (as clinically indicated): ANA w/ reflex, C3/C4,
        ESR/CRP

    -   Can consider: flow cytometry, bone marrow biopsy, cytogenetics
        and FISH (typically driven by hematology recs) 

Management 

-   Emergencies that may require urgent evaluation, management, or
    hospitalization  

    -   Febrile neutropenia (ANC \< 500), symptomatic anemia (cardiac
        symptoms), platelets \< 10k or \< 50k with bleeding, abnormal
        blood smear (schistocytes or blasts) 

    -   When pancytopenia is slow, progressive over time, or acute
        without any other precipitating factors and a specific etiology
        is in mind (e.g. HLH or marrow infiltrating infection), consult
        hematology for consideration of bone marrow syndromes and/or
        bone marrow biopsy 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Note: Bone marrow biopsy for acquired pancytopenia in the hospital
    setting often will not yield results that will change clinical
    management (I.e. most likely will just show an aplastic marrow) 

Leukocytosis -- Kenna Koehler

Background

-   Common progenitor cells (stem cells) are located in the bone marrow
    and give rise to erythrocytes, myeloblasts, megakaryoblasts

-   Normal WBC can vary by age and pregnancy, for the purpose of this
    section will assume this is for an average, non-pregnant adult

-   Chronic mild neutrophilic leukocytosis (10-20k) is common with
    tobacco use and obesity, both due to mechanisms related to chronic
    inflammation

-   Reactive (typically 11k-30k): surgery, exercise, trauma, burns,
    emotional stress

-   Leukemoid reaction (typically 50k-100k): severe infections
    (fulminant C difficile), organ rejection

-   If greater than 100k, think leukemia or myeloproliferative disorder

Evaluation

-   Neutrophilia: neutrophil count \>7k

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bacterial infection, pregnancy, rheumatologic disease, steroids,
    beta agonists, lithium, colony-stimulating factors, splenectomy or
    functional asplenia, congenital (hereditary/chronic idiopathic
    neutrophilia), Down syndrome, leukocyte adhesion deficiency,
    malignancy, smoking, obesity

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lymphocytosis: \>40% of WBC count or \>4,500k/mm^3^

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infections (pertussis, syphilis, CMV, EBV, hepatitis A/B/C, toxo),
    hypersensitivity reactions, thyrotoxicosis, Addison's disease,
    hematologic malignancies, "reactive"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Monocytosis: \>8% of WBC count or \>880/mm^3^

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infections (TB, fungal disease, protozoa, tick-borne), autoimmune
    disease, malignancy (CMML)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Eosinophilia: \>500/mm^3^

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hypersensitivity (asthma, urticaria, atopic dermatitis, eosinophilic
    esophagitis), drug reactions, malignancies, connective tissue
    disease, idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome, infections
    (helminths, Scarlet fever, Hansen's disease), sarcoidosis, SLE

-   Hypereosinophilia if AEC\>1500, typically merits heme evaluation

-   Hypereosinophilic syndrome: AEC\>1500 and organ dysfunction from
    eosinophils

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Basophilia (\>100/mm^3^)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CML, thyroid disease, IBC, chronic dermatitis, infections
    (varicella)

Venous Thromboembolism -- Lamiya Rodriguez

Background

-   Includes both deep vein thrombosis (DVTs) and pulmonary embolism
    (PE). See "Pulmonary Embolism" section in cardiology for more
    information on PEs

-   Risk factors for provoked DVT/PE

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Major risk factors: major surgery \>30 minutes, hospitalization \> 3
    days, C-section

-   Minor Risk Factors: surgery \<30 minutes, hospitalization \<3 days,
    pregnancy, estrogen therapy, reduced mobility \>3 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-transient risk factors: malignancy (active), myeloproliferative
    disorders, IBD, liver disease, hereditary thrombophilia (factor V
    Leiden and prothrombin gene mutations most common), antiphospholipid
    syndrome.

Evaluation

-   Asymmetric calf swelling of \>2cm sensitivity and specificity for
    DVT of 60-70%

-   Wells' Criteria for DVT can help guide diagnostic testing

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If a pt has a low pre-test probability, a negative D-dimer can rule
    out DVT

-   In a high pre-test probability pt a negative D-dimer is less helpful

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Whole-leg ultrasounds with doppler

Management

-   Prophylaxis: Padua score

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Score \> 4 high risk, recommend pharmacologic prophylaxis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Subcutaneous Low Molecular Weight Heparin (LMWH) or Subcutaneous
    Heparin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Score \<4 is low risk; recommend ambulation and SCDs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Treatment (see anticoagulation section)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin (LMWH, twice a day dosing)

-   Oral factor Xa inhibitors: rivaroxaban, apixaban

-   Intravenous unfractionated heparin

-   Warfarin (with bridge therapy)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Duration of treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Provoked: 3-6 months or until provoking factor (trauma, surgery,
    malignancy) is removed

-   Unprovoked: typically requires life-long anticoagulation along with
    assistance from hematology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Anticoagulation in malignancy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   LMWH or DOAC (most evidence for apixaban and rivaroxaban) while
    malignancy still active

-   Avoid Rivaroxaban and Edoxaban in GI malignancies (increased rates
    of bleeding)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Note -- in Anti-phospholipid syndrome, can only use warfarin

Additional Information

-   Should we get a follow up ultrasound?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   A follow up ultrasound at the CONCLUSION of anticoagulation can help
    establish a post-treatment baseline and provide a baseline study for
    future comparison that can be critical for the diagnosis of
    recurrent/new DVT (which is very difficult to determine
    radiographically without a comparison imaging study)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   What about IVC filters?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Select circumstances for these: In pts with acute DVT or PE and in
    whom anti-coagulation is absolutely contraindicated
    (thrombocytopenia, recent intra-cranial bleed, recent GI bleed)
    placement of a retrievable IVC filter should be discussed with
    Hematology and IR

Anticoagulation -- Madeleine Turcotte

+------------+---------+----------+----------+------------+---------+
| Agent      | Tr      | Re       | Pro      | Monitoring | Hold    |
|            | eatment | nal Dose | phylaxis |            | prior   |
|            | Dose    |          |          |            | to      |
|            |         |          |          |            | pr      |
|            |         |          |          |            | ocedure |
+============+=========+==========+==========+============+=========+
| Unfr       | 80 U/kg | No       | 5000 U   | PTT        | 6 hours |
| actionated | bolus,  | change   | q8h      | (automatic |         |
| heparin    | then 18 | n        |          | in order   |         |
|            | U/kg/hr | ecessary |          | set)       |         |
+------------+---------+----------+----------+------------+---------+
| Enoxaparin | 1 mg/kg | 1 mg/kg  | 40 mg    | LMWH level | 12      |
|            | q12h    | daily    | daily    | (anti-Xa   | hours   |
| (Lovenox)  |         |          |          | level)     |         |
|            |         |          |       or |            |         |
|            |         |          |          | Best       |         |
|            |         |          | 30 mg    | checked 4  |         |
|            |         |          | BID      | h after    |         |
|            |         |          |          | 4th dose   |         |
+------------+---------+----------+----------+------------+---------+
| Warfarin   | Start   | No       | N/A      | PT/INR     | Several |
| (Coumadin) | 2-5mg   | change   |          |            | days    |
|            | daily   |          |          | Use        | (Goal   |
|            | and     | n        |          | C          | INR     |
|            | monitor | ecessary |          | hromogenic | \<1.5)  |
|            | INR     |          |          | Factor X   |         |
|            |         |          |          | assay if   |         |
|            | Can     |          |          | pt has     |         |
|            | consult |          |          | APLS       |         |
|            | P       |          |          |            |         |
|            | harmacy |          |          |            |         |
+------------+---------+----------+----------+------------+---------+
| Dabigatran | After 5 | Avoid    | N/A      | Can test   | At      |
| (Pradaxa)  | days of | use      |          | drug level | least   |
|            | a       |          |          | if         | 48hrs   |
|            | par     |          |          | concerned  |         |
|            | enteral |          |          |            |         |
|            | AC,     |          |          | (Any DOAC) |         |
|            |         |          |          |            |         |
|            | 150 mg  |          |          |            |         |
|            | BID     |          |          |            |         |
+------------+---------+----------+----------+------------+---------+
| R          | 15 mg   | Avoid    | 10mg QD  |            | At      |
| ivaroxaban | BID x21 | use in   |          |            | least   |
| (Xarelto)  | d then  | CrCl\<30 |          |            | 48hrs   |
|            | 20 mg   |          |          |            |         |
|            | daily   |          |          |            |         |
+------------+---------+----------+----------+------------+---------+
| Apixaban   | 10mg    | VTE: No  | 2.5 mg   | A Fib:     | At      |
| (Eliquis)  | BID     | ad       | BID      |            | least   |
|            | x7d,    | justment |          | 2.5mg BID, | 48hrs   |
|            | then    |          |          | if 2 of    |         |
|            | 5mg BID |          |          | the        |         |
|            |         |          |          | following: |         |
|            |         |          |          |            |         |
|            |         |          |          | Cr 1.5,    |         |
|            |         |          |          | Age \> 80  |         |
|            |         |          |          |            |         |
|            |         |          |          | Weig       |         |
|            |         |          |          | ht \< 60kg |         |
+------------+---------+----------+----------+------------+---------+
| Edoxaban   | After 5 | 30 mg    |  N/A     | Best       | At      |
| (Savaysa)  | days of | for      |          | studied    | least   |
|            | a       |          |          | option in  | 48hrs   |
|            | par     | CrCl     |          | renal      |         |
|            | enteral | 15-50    |          | d          |         |
|            | AC,     |          |          | ysfunction |         |
|            |         | Avoid if |          |            |         |
|            | 60 mg   | CrCl \>  |          |            |         |
|            | daily   | 95       |          |            |         |
+------------+---------+----------+----------+------------+---------+

Additional Information

-   VA is starting to move towards rivaroxaban and apixaban for extended
    secondary thromboprophylaxis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Write in your PADR for apixaban citing "pt uses a pillbox and cannot
    use dabigatran"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Renal dysfunction: favor warfarin, apixaban or edoxaban

-   Hx of GI bleed: avoid dabigatran, rivaroxaban, edoxaban (may have
    higher risk of GI bleed)

-   Pregnancy: UFH/LMWH (other agents may cross the placenta)

-   BMI \>40: Apixaban or rivaroxaban can be used per 2016 ISTH
    guidelines (but avoid dabigatran)

-   GI malabsorption (e.g. Crohn\'s): Caution with DOACs, consider
    enoxaparin

Transitioning between Anticoagulants with DOACs

+--------+--------+---------------------------------------------------+
| From   | To     | Timing                                            |
+========+========+===================================================+
| DOAC   | Wa     | Low-moderate risk DVT/PE: start warfarin while pt |
|        | rfarin | is on DOAC, stop DOAC on day 3 of warfarin        |
|        |        | therapy, and check INR on day 4                   |
|        |        |                                                   |
|        |        | High risk DVT/PE: start LMWH or UFH, then start   |
|        |        | warfarin                                          |
+--------+--------+---------------------------------------------------+
| DOAC   | LMWH   | Stop DOAC and start LMWH when due for next DOAC   |
|        |        | dose                                              |
+--------+--------+---------------------------------------------------+
| DOAC   | UFH    | Start IV heparin with bolus when next DOAC dose   |
|        |        | is due                                            |
+--------+--------+---------------------------------------------------+
| LMWH   | Wa     | LMWH and warfarin given simultaneously until INR  |
|        | rfarin | is therapeutic for 24h                            |
+--------+--------+---------------------------------------------------+
| LMWH   | DOAC   | Stop LMWH and start DOAC when due for next dose   |
|        |        | of LMWH (within 2h)                               |
+--------+--------+---------------------------------------------------+
| UFH    | DOAC   | Start DOAC when IV stopped (30min prior to        |
|        |        | cessation if high risk for thrombosis)            |
+--------+--------+---------------------------------------------------+
| Wa     | DOAC   | Start DOAC when INR \< 2.0                        |
| rfarin |        |                                                   |
+--------+--------+---------------------------------------------------+

Peri-procedural Management of Anticoagulation

-   Temporary IVC filter indicated in pts with very recent acute VTE
    (within 3-4 weeks) if the procedure requires AC delay \>12 hours

-   For those at high risk of thromboembolism

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider continuing AC for low-bleeding-risk procedures like dental
    procedures, cutaneous biopsy/excision, ICD placement, and
    endovascular procedures.

-   Can bridge with LMWH or heparin drip

+---------------+------------------------------+-----------------------+
|               | Stop before procedure        | Restart after         |
|               |                              | procedure             |
+===============+==============================+=======================+
| Warfarin      | 5 days prior, check INR day  | 12 to 24 hours after  |
|               | of                           |                       |
+---------------+------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Dabigatran    | 48 hours prior               | 1 day after           |
|               |                              |                       |
|               | (longer if CrCl 30-50 or     | (2 days if high       |
|               | procedure is high bleeding   | bleeding risk)        |
|               | risk)                        |                       |
+---------------+------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Rivaroxaban   |                              |                       |
+---------------+------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Apixaban      |                              |                       |
+---------------+------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Edoxaban      |                              |                       |
+---------------+------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Heparin       | Stop infusion 4-5 hours      | 24 hours after        |
|               | prior                        |                       |
+---------------+------------------------------+-----------------------+
| Enoxaparin    | 12 - 24 hours prior          | 24 hours after,       |
|               |                              | (48-72 hours if high  |
|               |                              | bleeding risk)        |
+---------------+------------------------------+-----------------------+

Strategies for Reversal of Anticoagulation

Warfarin

-   Vitamin K: onset within a few hours but takes 24-48 hrs for full
    effect

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Life threatening bleeding: Give IV Vitamin K 10 mg over 30 minutes.

-   Intracranial bleed, bleed with hemodynamic instability, emergent
    procedure non-life threatening

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   INR \<5: Vitamin K not recommended

-   INR 5-10: Vitamin K 1-5 mg IV or PO

-   INR \>10: Vitamin K 5mg PO or 5 mg IV

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Prior to surgery

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Rapid reversal INR \> 5: 5mg Vit K IV (24 hours prior to procedure)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   FFP: 15 ml/kg (e.g. 4 units/70 kg person) if need reversal \<24 hrs,
    plus give Vitamin K

-   KCentra (\$\$\$): Contains Factors II, VII, IX, and X with Protein
    C, Protein S, and heparin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Given instead of plasma when insufficient time for plasma/Vit K to
    work (i.e. for life threatening hemorrhage)

-   Avoid giving in HIT

-   Administer with Vitamin K

Dabigatran

-   Idarucizumab (\$\$\$) will reverse if prolonged thrombin time
    (remember to check): Consult Hematology

Factor Xa inhibitors: rivaroxaban, apixaban, edoxaban

-   FEIBA (Factor VIII inhibitor bypassing activity): can promote
    coagulation but is [NOT a reversal agent]{.underline}; limited data
    to support use

-   Consult Hematology before using; andexanet alfa (FDA approved) is
    not on VUMC formulary but is on the VA formulary

Hypercoagulable States -- Chris Cann

Background

-   Virchow's triad: 1. Hypercoagulability 2. Stasis 3. Endothelial
    injury

-   Diagnostic thrombophilia testing indications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Idiopathic or recurrent VTE

-   First VTE at \<40 years old

-   VTE in the setting of strong family history

-   VTE in unusual vascular site (cerebral, renal, mesenteric)

-   Recurrent pregnancy loss

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Must consider if thrombophilia testing will change clinical
    management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If the unprovoked VTE warrants indefinite anticoagulation then
    testing may not be helpful

-   However, if VTE provoked by minor risk factor (OCPs) with an
    underlying thrombophilia might change the decision, then testing may
    be informative

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Separated into acquired and hereditary conditions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hereditary: Factor V Leiden mutation, prothrombin mutation, protein
    C or S deficiency, antithrombin deficiency

-   Acquired

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Antiphospholipid syndrome (APLS)

-   Myeloproliferative neoplasms, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria

-   Heparin induced thrombocytopenia (HIT)

-   Major surgery/trauma

-   Nephrotic syndrome

-   Smoking

-   Pregnancy

-   Oral contraceptives

-   Immobilization (bedridden, hip/knee replacement)

-   Active malignancy

-   Estrogen replacement therapy

-   Note: Travel (plane, train, automobile) is NOT on this list and this
    is NOT considered a provoking risk factor

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Testing: All specific testing for hereditary disorders and APS
    should be performed at least 4-6 weeks after an acute thrombotic
    event or discontinuation of anticoagulant/thrombolytic therapies to
    avoid interference.

Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome (APLS)

Background

-   Most common acquired disorder (anti-phospholipid antibodies present
    in 3-5% population)

-   Recurrent pregnancy loss, provoked DVT in young, unprovoked VTE and
    arterial thrombosis in young, thrombosis unusual sites, thrombosis
    in autoimmune disease

-   This is a clinicopathologic diagnosis (need both clinical and
    laboratory criteria)

Evaluation

-   Positive for at least 1 lab criterion on at least 2 occasions, at
    least 12 weeks apart:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lupus anticoagulant: can occur in relation to drugs or infection;
    transient are associated with thrombotic risk

-   Anticardiolipin antibodies

-   β 2GP1 (anti- β2-glycoprotein) antibodies

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Must also meet at least 1 of the following clinical criteria:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Vascular thrombosis: DVT, arterial thrombosis, or small vessel
    thrombosis of any organ

-   Pregnancy loss: there are specific criteria for this--consult
    UpToDate or other resource

Management

-   Aspirin for primary prevention; warfarin for treatment (INR 2-3)

-   Do NOT use DOACs for triple positive APLS (see TRAPS trial:
    rivaroxaban inferior to warfarin)

-   Rituximab for recurrent thrombosis despite anticoagulation
    (controversial): call Hematology

    Catastrophic APLS

-   Presentation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Widespread thrombosis with multi-organ failure 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Intra-abdominal: Renal failure, pancreatitis, adrenal and splenic
    infarcts, mesenteric ischemia

-   Pulmonary: respiratory failure

-   CNS involvement including stroke

    -   Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (due to tissue necrosis)

    -   TMA/DIC syndrome

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diagnostic criteria

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Evidence of multi-organ involvement (3 or more) 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Confirmed by imaging techniques

-   Renal involvement can be defined as rise in serum creatinine by 50%,
    severe systemic hypertension, or proteinuria (\>500mg/d)  

    -   Development of manifestations simultaneously or within 1 week  

    -   Confirmation by histopathology of small vessel occlusion  

    -   Laboratory confirmation of aPL antibodies (detected on 2
        occasions 12 weeks apart) 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Parenteral anticoagulation and high dose steroids

-   For refractory cases: PLEX, rituximab

Heparin-induced Thrombocytopenia (HIT)

Type 1: Mild and self-limited (not immune-mediated)

-   Occurs within the first 2 days of first-time exposure

-   Platelet count normalizes with continued heparin therapy

Type 2 (what we typically refer to as HIT): Immune mediated

-   Fall in platelet 30% to over 50% (even if platelet count \>150)
    and/or thrombotic event has occurred

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   4-10 days after new exposure to heparin derivative OR ≤

-   1 day after restarting heparin derivative that had been used 30-100
    days prior

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If exposed to heparin within 100 days, will have platelet drop
    within 24 hr

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Frequency: unfractionated heparin \> LMWH; surgical wards \> medical
    wards

-   50% will have thrombotic event in 30 days if HIT is untreated with
    20% mortality

-   Arterial thrombi are common in HIT

-   HIT results from antibodies to complexes of platelet factor 4 (PF4)
    and heparin, further activating platelets (the activated platelets
    aggregate causing thrombocytopenia)

Evaluation

-   4T score (0-8 points):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Thrombocytopenia (0-2 pts): degree and nadir of platelet count drop

-   Timing (0-2 pts): timing of fall after initial or recurrent heparin
    exposure

-   Thrombosis (0-2 pts): thrombosis, skin necrosis, non-necrotizing
    lesions, acute systemic reaction to heparin

-   Other causes of thrombocytopenia (0-2 pts): more points if no
    alternate cause

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Solid-phase ELISA for heparin-PF4 antibodies

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   0.2-0.4 is indeterminate

-   \> 0.4 is positive

-   \> 1.4 HIT is likely

-   \> 2 confirms HIT

-   The lab at VUMC will perform functional SRA reflexively for all
    values \>0.2

Management

-   0-3 points: Low concern for HIT; can restart heparin

-   4-5 points: Intermediate probability (\~10%); hold heparin, start
    non-heparin anticoagulant

-   6 points: High probability (\~50%); hold heparin, start non-heparin
    anticoagulant

-   Argatroban (direct thrombin inhibitor) for prophylaxis and treatment
    of thrombosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid platelet transfusions as can increase thrombogenic effect

-   Avoid warfarin until complete platelet recovery as may cause
    microthrombosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hematology consult for all confirmed HIT

Factor V Leiden Mutation

Evaluation

-   Activated protein C resistance assay

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   APC ratio in pt vs. normal

-   Normal \>2.0, heterozygotes 1.5-2.0, homozygotes \<1.5

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   FVL mutation is then determined via PCR

-   Screen with APC assay rather than PCR initially; cost effective

Management

-   VTE treatment same as general population

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   VTE 4-8x risk in heterozygotes; 80x risk in homozygotes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid OCPs: increased risk for VTE

Prothrombin Gene Mutation

Evaluation: PCR of G20210A mutation (2-4% prevalence)

Management: VTE treatment same as general population and avoid OCPs

Protein C and S Deficiency

Background

-   Autosomal dominant; first event occurs between 10-50 years of age

-   Synthesized in liver and Vit K dependent; therefore low levels in
    hepatic dysfunction and warfarin use/vitamin K deficiency

-   Protein C: low in settings of thrombosis, DIC, nephrotic syndrome,
    intra/post-op

-   Protein S: low in infectious (HIV) and autoimmune processes (IBD)

-   Protein S decreases during pregnancy (decreased free protein S,
    normal total protein S)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Do not misdiagnose a pregnant pt with PS deficiency

Evaluation

-   Functional Protein C and S assays

Management

-   VTE treatment same as general population

-   Avoid OCPs

-   High risk pts may require protein C concentrate prior to surgery

-   Increased risk of warfarin-induced skin necrosis

Antithrombin Deficiency

Background

-   Autosomal dominant, does not skip generations

-   VTE in unusual sites (cerebral sinuses, renal veins)

-   Present \< 50, but rarely in first two decades

-   Decreased in liver disease, nephrotic syndrome, protein losing
    enteropathy, burn, trauma, bypass surgery, metastatic tumors,
    premenopausal, OCP use, pregnancy

Evaluation

-   Functional antithrombin activity (AT-heparin cofactor assay)

-   Then perform antigen quantity testing

Management

-   Can use argatroban as does not require antithrombin function

-   Warfarin preferred in VTE (titrate up based on expression of
    antithrombin deficiency)

Bleeding Coagulopathies -- Hayley Hawkins

-   Bleeding tendency or dysfunction in clot formation can occur from
    either a quantitative or qualitative platelet defect, deficiency or
    inhibitor of coagulation factors, or compromise of vascular
    integrity

-   Platelet disorders will present with mucocutaneous bleeding,
    petechiae, mild bleeding immediately following surgery, impaired
    wound healing

-   Coagulation defects will present with deep tissue bleeding in
    joints/muscles resulting in hemarthroses, hematomas, sometimes
    delayed but severe bleeding after surgery, and intracranial
    hemorrhage

Quantitative or Qualitative Platelet Defect

Thrombocytopenia: see "Thrombocytopenia" section

von Willebrand Disease (vWD)

-   Most common inherited bleeding disorder, but can be secondary or
    acquired by other disease states

-   Three types

    -   Type 1 (most common): quantitative defect with normal vWF
        function

    -   Type 2: qualitative defect with abnormal vWF function despite
        normal quantity

    -   Type 3 (rare): complete absence of vWF, phenotypically similar
        to hemophilia A (vWF forms complex with factor VIII)

-   Causes of acquired vWD

    -   Lymphoproliferative disorders: CLL, NHL, plasma cell dyscrasias

    -   Myeloproliferative disorders: PV, ET, or myelofibrosis

    -   Autoimmune diseases: SLE

    -   Sheer stress: aortic stenosis -- Heidi syndrome, LVAD, ECMO

    -   Hypothyroidism

-   Diagnosis: "vW Profile" = vWF Ag, Factor VIII Activity, Ristocetin
    Cofactor Activity

-   Management:

    -   Major bleeding or major surgery: give VFW concentrate (some
        formulations have FVIII)

    -   Minor bleeding or surgery or prophylaxis: DDAVP, TXA or
        aminocaproic acid in some circumstances

Other causes of qualitative platelet defects

-   Uremic platelet dysfunction

-   Medications: NSAIDs, anti-platelets (ASA, Plavix), SSRIs (serotonin
    required for platelet activation), and melatonin (suggested by
    pre-clinical studies)

Deficiency or Inhibitor of Coagulation Factors

Hemophilia A (factor VIII deficiency) and hemophilia B (factor IX
deficiency)

-   X-linked recessive inheritance

-   Frequently presents with hemarthroses and hematomas

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diagnosis: Isolated prolonged PTT with normalization upon mixing
    study

-   Management: Purified/recombinant Factor VIII or IX, mild disease can
    be managed with desmopressin, consult Benign Hematology on admission

    Acquired FVIII Inhibitor

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Onset in older age (60s) and frequently presents with significant
    intramuscular hematomas

-   Disease associations in 50% of cases (other 50% idiopathic):
    autoimmune (e.g. SLE), malignancy (paraneoplastic), Pemphigus,
    drug-induced (e.g. interferon, penicillins), or chronic GvHD

-   Diagnosis: Elevated PTT that does not normalize with mixing study

-   Management:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Always consult Hematology (rare disorder with major bleeding
    complications)

-   Bleeding: Typically need a factor VIII bypassing agent (FEIBA)

-   Immunosuppression: prednisone 1mg/kg, rituximab often also used
    front line

    Other Causes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Factor VIII deficiency: see vWD above

-   Vitamin K deficiency

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Caused by malnutrition, liver disease (biliary obstruction), or
    iatrogenic with warfarin

-   Diagnosis: elevated PT, prolonged PTT if severe, hepatic function
    panel

-   Management: IV vitamin K 10mg x 3 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   DIC and liver dysfunction/cirrhosis

-   A FVIII level can help distinguish between the two (elevated or
    normal in liver dysfunction and decreased in DIC since it is not
    hepatically derived)

-   Amyloidosis: can cause factor X deficiency

-   Medications: warfarin, DOACs

Compromise of Vascular Integrity

-   Amyloidosis: can present as GI bleeding, purpura or ecchymoses (e.g.
    Raccoon eyes)

-   Vasculitis: purpura, alveolar hemorrhage (DAH), intracranial
    hemorrhage, GI bleeding

-   Vitamin C deficiency: can present with bleeding gums, GI bleeding,
    ecchymoses, hematomas, anemia

-   AVMs (fragile vessels that easily bleed)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hereditary hemorrhagic Telangiectasia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   2^nd^ most common inherited bleeding disorder

-   Often presents with epistaxis, GI bleeding

-   AVMs found in GI tract, lung (may cause shunting), liver (can
    contribute to cirrhosis), brain

-   vWD

-   von Willebrand multimers play direct role in modulating angiogenesis

-   Heidi Syndrome: acquired vWD due to aortic stenosis, presents with
    GI bleeding from AVMs

Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation (DIC) - Eric Singhi

Background

-   Concurrent activation of the coagulation pathway and fibrinolytic
    pathway

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consumption of platelets, fibrin, and coagulation factors 🡪
    fibrinolysis 🡪 end organ damage and hemolysis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Etiologies:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infection/sepsis, liver disease, pancreatitis, trauma

-   Malignancies: mucin-secreting pancreatic/gastric adenocarcinoma,
    brain tumors, prostate cancer, all acute leukemias, acute
    promyelocytic leukemia

-   Obstetric complications: preeclampsia/eclampsia, placental abruption

-   Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction (e.g. ABO incompatible
    transfusion)

Evaluation

-   Exam: petechiae, bleeding (mucosal, IV site, surgical wound site,
    hematuria), ecchymoses, thrombosis (i.e. cold, pulseless
    extremities)

-   Laboratory evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CBC, PT/INR, aPTT, fibrinogen, d-dimer, peripheral blood smear

-   "DIC labs": q6h fibrinogen, PT/INR, aPTT (space out when lower risk)

-   Findings suggestive of DIC: thrombocytopenia, prolonged aPTT and
    PT/INR, hypofibrinogenemia, elevated D-dimer, fibrin degradation
    products, schistocytes

-   A FVIII level can help distinguish between the DIC and liver
    dysfunction: elevated or normal in liver dysfunction and decreased
    in DIC since it is not hepatically derived

Management

-   Treat the underlying cause

-   Vitamin K for INR \> 1.7 or bleeding

-   Hypofibrinogenemia treatment: Cryoprecipitate 5-10 units if
    fibrinogen \< 100

-   Thrombocytopenia treatment: platelet transfusion as normally
    indicated

-   DVT ppx if not bleeding and platelet \> 50

-   VTE: anticoagulation if platelet \> 50 and no massive bleeding

Transfusion Medicine -- R. Dixon Dorand

For emergent transfusions, call the blood bank (615-322-2233)

-   RNs on 10T and 11N can follow transfusion protocols for pRBCs and
    plts -- enter as a "Nursing Communication" or as part of the
    Hematology/Oncology Admission Order set.

-   At VUMC, all special processing of blood products (such as
    irradiation) will be decided by blood bank based on special
    considerations listed in order set. Examples include: stem cell
    transplant, hematologic malignancy, or thalassemia

-   Pts with frequent transfusions (e.g. sickle cell hemoglobinopathy)
    should have an "RBC Extended Phenotype" ordered (once) for minor RBC
    antigens to avoid immunization and antibody development to these
    proteins

-   You may ask the VUMC hematology lab to email you pictures of the
    peripheral smear

VA: Orders Tab -- Blood Bank Orders -- follow prompts to select
appropriate product. Must order both the blood product AND the
transfusion order ("Transfuse blood")

-   You need to specify all special processing such as irradiation

-   To order "Type & Screen" as a lab, you must go to Blood Bank Orders

-   Type & Screen and Transfusion results are under the Blood tab in
    Results

Red Blood Cell Transfusion

-   Volume 200-300 mL per unit prbc

-   In general, 1 unit of packed RBCs increases Hgb by 1g/dL and HCT by
    \~3%

-   Assessment of the post-transfusion Hgb can be performed 15 min
    following transfusion, but ideally 1 hour after completion

Indications:

-   Hgb \<9-10 g/dL: Acute coronary syndrome

-   Hgb \<8 g/dL or Hct \<25: Bone marrow failure or receiving
    antineoplastic therapy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Also sometimes used in pts with pre-existing CAD

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hgb \<7 g/dL or Hct \<21: ICU, GI Bleeding, oncology pt on treatment

Platelets Transfusion

Indications for transfusion

-   \<11 k/µL: all pts, reduce risk of spontaneous hemorrhage (use on
    BMT, Brittingham)

-   \<50 k/µL: active bleeding, scheduled to undergo select invasive
    procedure

-   \<100 k/µL: CNS hemorrhage, intrathecal catheter

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   This is also the threshold used for most neurosurgical procedures

Fresh Frozen Plasma (FFP) and Cryoprecipitate (Cryo)

Cryoprecipitate: FFP enriched for von Willebrand factor, factor VIII,
factor XIII, and fibrinogen

FFP

-   Once thawed, must be used in 24 hrs (due to decline in labile
    coagulation factors)

-   Must be ABO compatible but not crossmatched or Rh typing

-   Only administer FFP if INR ≥1.7 (FFP will not fix an INR \< 1.7)

Indications for transfusion

-   Bleeding:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   FFP If INR \>1.7

-   Cryoprecipitate if fibrinogen \<100.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   DIC:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fibrinogen \<100: Transfuse 5 -- 10 units cryoprecipitate and repeat
    fibrinogen. If bleeding, consider raising transfusion threshold of
    cryoprecipitate to fibrinogen \<150

-   For elevated INR, consider FFP transfusion. Thresholds for doing
    this vary by attending

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cirrhosis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   General concept: PT/INR, aPTT are unreliable markers for bleeding.
    Fibrinogen ≤100 -- 120 or thromboelastography are better surrogates
    for bleeding risk

-   Transfuse fibrinogen ≤100 -- 120 if the pt is actively bleeding or
    about to undergo a procedure or surgery other than paracentesis

-   Transfuse FFP based on hepatology team preference (generally few
    indications for FFP)

Transfusion Premedication and Reactions

-   If you are concerned about a serious transfusion reaction, pause the
    transfusion and contact the blood bank ASAP

-   Order the transfusion reaction blood testing in Epic. You will send
    a CBC, the bag of blood products, and the completed form to the
    blood bank for analysis

Premedication:

-   Only if history of severe reaction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diphenhydramine 25-50mg IV

-   Acetaminophen 650 mg PO

-   Meperidine 25-50 mg IV (optional for chills)

-   Hydrocortisone 50 mg IV (optional, for severe reactions or reactions
    despite acetaminophen and diphenhydramine)

+-------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| Reaction    | Signs & Symptoms | Etiology         | Clinical Action |
+=============+==================+==================+=================+
| Allergic    | Pruritus, hives  | Antibodies to    | Pause           |
| (mild)      | limited to small | transfused       | transfusion.    |
|             | area             | plasma proteins  | Administer      |
|             |                  |                  | antihistamines. |
|             |                  |                  | Resume          |
|             |                  |                  | transfusion if  |
|             |                  |                  | improved; NO    |
|             |                  |                  | samples         |
|             |                  |                  | necessary. If   |
|             |                  |                  | no improvement  |
|             |                  |                  | in 30 min treat |
|             |                  |                  | as moderate to  |
|             |                  |                  | severe.         |
+-------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| Allergic\   | Generalized      | Antibodies to\   | Administer      |
| (moderate\  | hives\           | transfused       | antihistamines, |
| to severe)  | (\>2/3 body      | plasma\          | epinephrine,    |
|             | surface),\       | proteins usually | vasopressors    |
|             | bronchospasm &   | IgE but can also | and             |
|             | dyspnea,         | be IgA. Possible | corticosteroids |
|             | abdominal pain,  | allergen in      | as needed. Send |
|             | hypotension,\    | blood product    | product to      |
|             | nausea,          |                  | blood bank.     |
|             | anaphylaxis      |                  |                 |
+-------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| Febrile     | Rise of temp     | Cytokines        | Mild:           |
| No          | \>1°C, chills,   | released from    | administer      |
| n-Hemolytic | rigors, anxiety. | residual white   | antipyretics as |
|             |                  | blood cells in   | needed          |
|             |                  | the blood        |                 |
|             |                  | product          |                 |
+-------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| Acute\      | Hemoglobinemia   | Intravascular    | Treat shock     |
| Hemolytic   | /\               | hemolysis        | w/vasopressors; |
|             | uria, fever,     | usually due to   | maintain        |
|             | chills,\         | ABO              | airway;         |
|             | anxiety, shock,\ | incompatibility. | administer      |
|             | flank pain,      | Recheck for pt   | fluids and      |
|             | chest\           | ID or clinical   | maintain brisk  |
|             | pain,            | error.           | diuresis;       |
|             | unexplained\     |                  | monitor for     |
|             | bleeding,        | This is an       | AKI..\]         |
|             | cardiac\         | emergency.       | Administer      |
|             | arrest           |                  | blood products  |
|             |                  |                  | as needed after |
|             |                  |                  | etiology is     |
|             |                  |                  | clear.          |
+-------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| Septic      | Rise of temp \>  | Micro-organism   | Send bag/tubing |
|             | 2°C, sudden      | (i.e. bacteria)  | to transfusion  |
|             | hypotension or   | in donor bag     | medicine. Order |
|             | hypertension,\   | (Greater risk in | BCx. Broad      |
|             | shock            | apheresis vs.    | spectrum abx    |
|             |                  | RBC)             |  Pressor        |
|             |                  |                  | support if      |
|             |                  |                  | necessary.      |
+-------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| TRALI --\   | Acute            | Usually donor    | Respiratory     |
| T           | respiratory\     | HLA\             | support! Most   |
| ransfusion\ | distress         | antibodies from\ | will resolve    |
| Related\    | occurring\       | transfused       | within 24-96    |
| Acute Lung\ | within 6 hours\  | plasma.          | hours.          |
| Injury      | of transfusion.\ | Recipient has    | Steroids,       |
|             | Non-cardiogenic\ | corresponding\   | diuretics: no   |
|             | pulmonary edema\ | antigens; causes | known benefit.  |
|             | unresponsive to\ | neutrophil\      |                 |
|             | diuretics; Dx of | activation that\ |                 |
|             | exclusion.       | results in\      |                 |
|             |                  | extravasation    |                 |
|             |                  | of\              |                 |
|             |                  | fluid into air\  |                 |
|             |                  | spaces           |                 |
+-------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------+
| TACO -      | Cardiogenic      | Increased        | Diuretic        |
| Transfusion | pulmonary edema  | oncotic and      | therapy and     |
| Associated  | occurring within | pulmonary        | supportive care |
| Circulatory | 6 hours from the | capillary        |                 |
| Overload    | end of           | pressures (to a  |                 |
|             | transfusion.     | greater extent   |                 |
|             | Elevated BNP is  | than             |                 |
|             | often observed.  | crystalloid)     |                 |
|             | Can be seen with | resulting in     |                 |
|             | as little as one | pulmonary edema  |                 |
|             | unit of blood.   |                  |                 |
+-------------+------------------+------------------+-----------------+

Sickle Cell Crisis -- Michael J. Neuss

Background

-   Present with severe pain in bone, joints, chest, abdomen

-   Causes: (HIDISC) Hypoxia, Ischemia, Dehydration, Infection, Stress,
    Cold

-   Can't miss:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute chest: new infiltrate on CXR + another clinical symptom
    (fever, chest pain, hypoxia). Consult Benign Hematology immediately.
    Do not wait until the next day.

-   PE (ACS less likely in these pts), avascular necrosis of hip,
    priapism, stroke

Evaluation

-   Labs: ↑ LDH, Hgb/Hct (low; check versus baseline), retic, smear, WBC

-   If febrile: UA + blood cultures

-   Hgb S level only in certain circumstances (e.g. guides treatment in
    acute chest)

-   Imaging: CXR, MRI for hip pain, abdominal U/S or CT abdomen

-   Maintain active type and cross given probability of alloimmunization

Management

-   General

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Look for a care coordination yellow note in the Summary Tab

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Heme clinic will have specific management preferences for individual
    pts

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Maintain hydration, IVF at 150-200 cc/hr (if no contraindication)

-   Oxygen: goal sat \~95% (higher O2 goal will help to prevent further
    sickling)

-   Continue folic acid 1 mg QD

-   Continue hydroxyurea if uncomplicated pain crisis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hold if counts suppressed or concern for infection

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If in the MICU: consider discussion for plasma exchange (if Hgb SS
    or SC or S-Thal)

-   Transfuse: Simple transfusion if Hgb lower than baseline and/or
    complications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid transfusions when able, given risk of antibody formation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pain

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Will generally require opiates, often initiation of PCA

-   All SS pts should have pain plans. Inpt pain plans are in the
    problem list under sickle cell disease or in the care coordination
    section of Epic

-   Outpt plans (to which you will transition pts back prior to
    discharge) are not standardized in location, but can be under Media
    (with a pain contract) or found in notes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute chest:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consult Hematology at time of admission

-   Obtain HbS level

-   Avoid dehydration. Consider LR @ 125-200 cc/hr but caution with
    overhydration (may worsen pulmonary edema)

-   Incentive spirometry: atelectasis and hypoxia drive V/Q mismatching
    and further sickling

-   Transfuse hgb to goal of 10 (do not exceed to avoid hyperviscosity)

-   Pain control per pain plan

-   Consider Abx for CAP (vs HAP if risk factors)

-   Plasma exchange for moderate-severe cases (driven by hematology)

Lymphoma -- Danielle Fishman

Background

-   Classically characterized by lymphadenopathy and constitutional "B"
    symptoms: fevers, drenching night sweats and weight loss

-   Hodgkin (10%): superficial, nodal disease with orderly spread

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bimodal distribution: 15-35 years and \>50 years; M\>F

-   CD15+, CD30+ (Reed Sternberg cells "owl eyes")

-   Associated with EBV in immunocompromised pt

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-Hodgkin (90%): diffuse, nodal and extranodal disease with
    noncontiguous spread

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Average 65 years, M\>F, 85-90% B-cell

-   Associated with immunodeficiency (HIV, post-transplant), autoimmune
    disease, infection (EBV, HTLV-1, H pylori, HCV, Borrelia, C
    psittacosis, Coxiella)

General Evaluation

-   History: B symptoms, pruritus (10-15% of pt with HL), history of
    radiation

-   Physical Exam

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Evaluate head and neck, tonsils, axilla, testes, liver, spleen

-   Lymphadenopathy: painless, firm, fixed, \>1cm

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lab tests:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CBC, CMP, LDH, uric acid, phosphorus

-   Consider HBV, HCV, HIV, EBV, Quant gold, treponemal Ab, ANA

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Imaging:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CT chest, abdomen, pelvis

-   Most will eventually need PET-CT. MRI brain if neuro symptoms

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider LP for NHL with high risk of CNS involvement or presence of
    neurological symptoms

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Risk factors: Burkitt, lymphoblastic, testicular involvement,
    double/triple hit

-   Multiple LPs may be required to diagnose CNS lymphoma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diagnosis requires tissue

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Excisional lymph node biopsy: Surgical Oncology consult

-   Core biopsy: CT guided procedure consult

-   Of note, steroids may impact value of biopsy results

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lugano Classification: staging of lymphoma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   I. 1 LN region or single extra lymphatic organ/site without nodal
    involvement

-   II\. \>2 LN regions, same side of diaphragm

-   III\. LN regions on both sides of diaphragm

-   IV\. Disseminated disease w/ 1+ extralymphatic organ

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hodgkin:

-   IPS negative prognostic calculator: albumin \<4, hemoglobin \<10.5,
    male, stage IV disease, age\>45, WBC count\> 15K, lymphocyte \<8% of
    WBC count

-   Non-Hodgkin:

-   Good prognosis: Follicular, marginal zone, mycosis fungoides/Sezary
    syndrome

-   Poor prognosis: DLBCL -- can arise from low grade lymphoma (Richter
    transformation); Double**/**Triple hit: bcl-2, bcl-6, or myc
    aberrations; mantle cell, Burkitt, lymphoblastic lymphoma, and
    anaplastic large cell lymphoma

General Management:

-   ECG and TTE to establish pre-chemotherapy cardiac function---many
    chemo regimens with anthracyclines

-   Daily labs: CBC, TLS, LDH

-   TLS prophylaxis: mIVF, allopurinol

Common Chemotherapy Regimens for Lymphoma:

+-----------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Regimen         | Components                        | Use             |
+=================+===================================+=================+
| R-CHOP          | rituximab, cyclophosphamide,      | NHL             |
|                 | doxorubicin, vincristine,         |                 |
|                 | prednisone                        |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| R-EPOCH         | etoposide plus the drugs above    | NHL             |
|                 |                                   |                 |
|                 | (dosing is different)             | (Double/Triple  |
|                 |                                   | hit)            |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Hyper-CVAD      | cyclophosphamide, vincristine,    | NHL             |
|                 | doxorubicin, and dexamethasone    |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| HD-MTX + R      | high dose methotrexate +          | Primary CNS     |
|                 | rituximab                         | Lymphoma        |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| ABVD            | doxorubicin, bleomycin,           | HL              |
|                 | vinblastine, dacarbazine          |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+

Myelodysplastic Syndromes (MDS) -- Peter Hanna

Background

-   MDS is a malignant clonal myeloid disorder resulting in ineffective
    (dysplastic) hematopoiesis leading to peripheral cytopenias and a
    risk of transformation to acute myeloid leukemia (AML)

-   Usually idiopathic, a disease of the elderly (median onset at age
    70)

-   The WHO has several classification schemes for MDS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most important for classification is the percent of blasts in the
    bone marrow

-   Note \>20% blasts in marrow = AML. Thus MDS and AML are on a
    continuum

Presentation

-   50% asymptomatic; symptoms can include nonspecific but gradual
    fatigue, weakness

-   Dysplastic cells do not work properly 🡪 infections and bleeding are
    more likely

-   Macrocytic anemia is most common finding; followed by bicytopenia or
    pancytopenia

-   Isolated neutropenia or thrombocytopenia are unusual but possible

-   Ask about secondary causes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Exposure to chemicals (benzene, crude oil/gasoline industry,
    cigarette smoke), chemotherapy, radiation

-   Medications, alcohol use, chronic infections (HIV)

Evaluation

-   Goal is to rule out reversible causes of dysplasia and cytopenias

-   CBC w/differential, peripheral smear, B12, folate, HIV

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider copper and zinc

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dysplastic changes on peripheral smear: hypogranulated/hyposegmented
    neutrophils, hypogranulated platelets and macrocytosis of RBCs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Circulating myeloblasts can be seen

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Final diagnosis made by bone marrow biopsy

Management

-   Molecular characteristics define the "risk" of the disease and
    dictates treatments

-   Prognostic scoring tools: revised international prognostic staging
    system (R-IPSS)

-   Management general paradigm

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Asymptomatic: with low-risk disease: monitoring

-   Low-risk disease + symptoms due to anemia only: transfusions,
    erythrocyte stimulating agents, and treatment with Luspatercept

-   MDS with isolated del(5q): treated with lenalidomide

-   High-risk pts: treated with hypomethylating agents

-   Only curative intervention: hematopoietic stem cell transplant
    (HSCT)

Acute Leukemia-- Kenna Koehler

Background

-   AML: proliferation of myeloid blasts

    -   Most common acute leukemia in adults

    -   Median age of diagnosis is 65 years old

    -   AML has been associated with environmental factors (e.g.
        exposure to chemicals, radiation, tobacco, chemotherapy) and
        genetic abnormalities (e.g. trisomy 21; Fanconi anemia; Bloom\'s
        syndrome; various familial mutations)

    -   Pts with clonal hematopoiesis (MDS, myeloproliferative
        neoplasms, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, aplastic anemia)
        are at risk of transforming into AML

    -   APML

-   ALL: proliferation of lymphoid blasts

    -   2/3 of cases are B-cell ALL

-   Blasts accumulate in the bone marrow, blood, and other tissues

Presentation

-   Various cytopenias: anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia,
    neutropenia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can have elevated, normal, or low WBC

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Weakness, fatigue, infections, gingival bleeding, weight loss,
    ecchymosis, epistaxis, bone pain, fever, leukemia cutis

-   Electrolyte abnormalities (tumor lysis syndrome)

-   Extramedullary hematopoiesis: splenomegaly, hepatomegaly,
    lymphadenopathy

Evaluation

-   Diagnosis of acute leukemia requires one of the following

    -   20% blasts in the bone marrow

    -   20% blasts in the peripheral blood

    -   Presence of specific cytogenetic abnormality: t(8;21), inv(16),
        or t(15;17)

-   Diagnosis of APML

    -   Should suspect APML based on presence of atypical promyelocytes
        in bone marrow or peripheral blood (these cells typically have
        finely dispersed chromatin, prominent nucleoli, high nuclear to
        cytoplasmic ratio, and creased, folded, bilobed, kidney-shaped,
        or dumb-bell shaped nuclei) or the presence of Auer rods

    -   Diagnosis is confirmed with presence of *PML::RARA* fusion gene
        and/or the associated chromosomal translocation
        t(15;17)(q24.1;q21.2)

-   DIC: PT/INR, PTT, fibrinogen

-   TLS: potassium, uric acid, phosphorous

-   Neutropenic fever

-   Leukostasis

Management

-   Consult Hematology early

-   Obtain blood consent and double lumen PICC for access

-   Telemetry,TTE

-   Daily labs: CBC w/ diff, CMP, coags

-   Monitor for TLS, DIC, neutropenic fever

-   TLS prophylaxis with allopurinol

-   If concerned for APML, start ATRA right away (can start this before
    definitive diagnosis)

-   Can use hematology order set for nurse-driven PRBC, platelet, and
    electrolyte repletion

-   Will need specialized testing: bone marrow biopsy, molecular testing

Additional information

-   APML is a medical emergency due to high rate of mortality,
    especially from massive hemorrhage due to coagulopathy. This is why
    it's extremely important to start ATRA as soon as possible, even
    before definitive diagnosis is made

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Differentiation syndrome: promyelocytes differentiate

    -   Signs and symptoms: fever, SOB, hypotension, peripheral edema,
        pleural effusion, AKI

    -   Diagnosis: No defined criteria. If suspicious, discuss with
        hematology fellow

    -   Management: Steroids. If critically ill, hold ATRA and ATO and
        consider hydroxyurea

-   AML is broken down into 3 risk categories based on molecular
    studies:

    -   Good risk: t(8;21), inv(18), t(16;16), NPM1+

    -   Intermediate risk: normal karyotype, FLT3+

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   FLT3 inhibitors are midostaurin and gilteritinib

    -   Poor risk: TP53, everything else

Leukemia treatment overview

-   General strategy is to use "induction" chemotherapy to try to induce
    clinicopathologic (as opposed to molecular) "remission"

-   Defined as count recovery and \<5% blasts in bone marrow (on day 28)

-   Pts stay in hospital until neutrophil count \>500 (typically \~4
    weeks)

-   From there, bone marrow transplant (for high-risk disease) or
    "consolidation" chemo for normal-risk or low-risk disease

AML treatment

-   Induction

    -   Typical is "7+3" i.e. cytarabine on days 1-7 and idarubicin on
        days 1-3

    -   If therapy-related AML, MDS-related AML, or AML with
        cytogenetics similar to MDS, use "Vyxeos" which is liposomal
        daunorubicin and cytarabine on days 1, 3, and 5

    -   There are other induction regimens that can be used depending on
        specific cytogenetics and pt frailty, which is beyond the scope
        of the handbook

-   Consolidation

    -   Typically "HiDAC"(high-dose Ara-C i.e. cytarabine)

        -   Generally too toxic for pts with age \> 60, so a dose
            reduction is used

    -   In the case of relapse, typical treatment is a different
        high-dose chemo and BMT if possible

ALL treatment

-   Typical induction is "HyperCVAD" (hyper-fractionated
    cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin ("A" due to trade name
    Adriamycin), and dexamethasone

-   If t(9;22) (Philadelphia chromosome), use tyrosine kinase inhibitor
    (TKI)

-   If CD20+, use rituximab

Overview of Common Chemotherapy Regimens:

+---------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Regimen       | Components                        | Use             |
+===============+===================================+=================+
| 7+3           | Cytarabine (Ara-C) x 7 d and      | AML Induction   |
|               | anthracycline  (e.g. idarubicin   |                 |
|               | x3 d)                             |                 |
+---------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Vyxeos        | Cytarabine + liposomal            | AML-MRC or      |
|               | daunorubicin                      | t-AML           |
+---------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| CLAG-M        | Cladribine, cytarabine (Ara-C),   | AML induction   |
|               | Filgrastim (G-CSF), mitoxantrone  | (relap          |
|               |                                   | sed/refractory) |
+---------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| HIDAC         | high-dose cytarabine              | AML             |
|               |                                   | consolidation   |
+---------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| ATRA          | All-trans retinoic acid given     | APML            |
|               | with arsenic trioxide (ATO)       |                 |
+---------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| HyperCVAD/MA  | CVAD = Cyclophosphamide,          | ALL             |
|               | vincristine, doxorubicin,         |                 |
|               | dexamethasone                     |                 |
|               |                                   |                 |
|               | MA = methotrexate/cytarabine      |                 |
|               |                                   |                 |
|               | (Given as alternating cycles)     |                 |
+---------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| R-CHOP        | rituximab, cyclophosphamide,      | NHL             |
|               | doxorubicin, vincristine,         |                 |
|               | prednisone                        |                 |
+---------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| R-EPOCH       | etoposide + rituximab,            | NHL             |
|               | cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,    |                 |
|               | vincristine, prednisone           |                 |
+---------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| ABVD          | doxorubicin, bleomycin,           | HL              |
|               | vinblastine, dacarbazine          |                 |
+---------------+-----------------------------------+-----------------+

Plasma Cell Dyscrasias -- Rahul Shah, Jennifer Marvin-Peek

Background

-   A heterogenous group of benign, premalignant, and malignant
    conditions characterized by clonal proliferation of plasma cells

-   Results in over-production of monoclonal immunoglobulins or
    polypeptides (e.g. M-protein) that can be detected in serum and/or
    urine

-   Includes monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS),
    smoldering myeloma (SMM), multiple myeloma (MM), Waldenstrom's
    macroglobulinemia (WM), extra-medullary plasmacytoma, AL
    amyloidosis, POEMS syndrome

-   Spectrum of MGUS, SMM, and MM represents natural progression of same
    disease process

-   Complications: increased infectious risk, cytopenias, renal failure,
    hyperviscosity syndrome, malignant hypercalcemia, pain crisis from
    bony disease

-   Elevated gamma/protein gap (serum total protein minus albumin \>4)
    often prompts work-up for an underlying plasma cell dyscrasia (high
    specificity but low sensitivity)

+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Symptoms                        | Signs                              |
+=================================+====================================+
| Fatigue, weakness, weight loss  | Anemia (Hgb \<10)                  |
|                                 |                                    |
| Bone pain                       | Renal insufficiency (Cr \> 2)      |
|                                 |                                    |
| Paresthesias, neuropathy,       | Hypercalcemia (Ca \> 11.5)         |
| radiculopathy                   |                                    |
|                                 | Elevated protein gap (Total        |
| Visual disturbances             | protein - Alb \> 4)                |
|                                 |                                    |
| (if hyperviscosity present)     | Osteolytic bone lesions (typically |
|                                 | central)                           |
| Lymphadenopathy (uncommon)      |                                    |
|                                 | Unexplained heavy proteinuria      |
| Fever (uncommon)                |                                    |
|                                 | Rouleux formation on blood smear   |
+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+

Evaluation

-   CBC w/ diff, peripheral blood smear, CMP (for Ca, Cr, albumin), LDH,
    CRP, urinalysis

-   SPEP with immunofixation, UPEP (24-hour urine) with immunofixation,
    serum free light chains (FLC)

-   Quantitative immunoglobulins (IgA, IgM, IgG, IgD, IgE)

-   If Hgb \<10, Cr \>2, Ca \>11.5, M-protein \>1.5, non-IgG M-spike,
    abnormal FLC ratio:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bone marrow biopsy + cytogenetics

-   β2-microglobulin, serum viscosity (in WM)

-   Skeletal imaging to identify bone lesions: skeletal survey (x-ray)
    often done initially, then more sensitive CT/PET-CT/MRI if biopsy
    shows SMM/MM

-   If considering amyloidosis: abdominal wall fat pad biopsy with Congo
    red staining typically sufficient vs. direct biopsy of
    amyloid-involved tissue

+-----------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+
| Additional Tips for   |                       |                      |
| Lab Interpretation    |                       |                      |
+=======================+=======================+======================+
| SPEP/UPEP             | Free light chains     | Urinalysis           |
|                       | (FLC)                 |                      |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+
| Initial screening     | Ratio of kappa/lambda | Detects albumin, not |
| test to look and      | \>3 highly suggestive | light chains         |
| quantify M-protein    | of plasma cell        |                      |
|                       | dyscrasia or          |                      |
| Serum immunofixation  | amyloidosis           |                      |
| determines clonality  |                       | In myeloma cast      |
|                       |                       | nephropathy,         |
| (e.g. mono or         |                       | dipstick will be     |
| polyclonal)           | Ratio 1.65 to 3 can   | negative since       |
|                       | be due to infectious  | proteinuria is from  |
|                       | process or renal      | FLC (i.e.            |
|                       | insufficiency         | Bence-Jones          |
| Monoclonal spike      |                       | proteinuria)         |
| \>1.5 is indicative   |                       |                      |
| of underlying         |                       |                      |
| dyscrasia             | Helpful in pts that   |                      |
|                       | only produce          | In AL amyloid,       |
|                       | Bence-Jones protein   | dipstick will be     |
|                       | (FLC w/o heavy chain) | positive 2/2 albumin |
| Polyclonal spike      | which isn't seen on   | loss from nephrotic  |
| suggests infectious,  | SPEP                  | syndrome             |
| inflammatory, or      |                       |                      |
| reactive etiology     |                       |                      |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+----------------------+

+-----------------+-----------------+--------------+-------------------+
|                 | MGUS            | SMM          | MM                |
+=================+=================+==============+===================+
| \% Plasma Cells | \<10%           | 10-60%       | ≥ 10% (typically  |
| in BM           |                 |              | \>30%)            |
+-----------------+-----------------+--------------+-------------------+
| Monoclonal      | IgG, IgA, IgM:  | IgG or IgA   | IgG or IgA \>3    |
| Protein         | 1.5 -3          | \>3          |                   |
+-----------------+-----------------+--------------+-------------------+
| Laboratory      | Normal Hgb, Ca, | Normal Hgb,  | ↓Hgb, ↑Ca, ↑Cr    |
| studies         | Cr              | Ca, Cr       |                   |
+-----------------+-----------------+--------------+-------------------+
| Symptoms        | None            | None         | Lytic bone        |
|                 |                 |              | lesions, fatigue  |
+-----------------+-----------------+--------------+-------------------+
| Prognosis       | 1% / year       | 10% / year   | R-ISS staging     |
|                 | progression to  | progression  | (see below)       |
|                 | MM              | to MM        |                   |
+-----------------+-----------------+--------------+-------------------+
| Monitoring      | Monitoring only | Monitoring   | Chemotherapy,     |
| and/or          |                 | only         | plus SCT for      |
| Treatment       | Yearly:         |              | eligible pts      |
|                 |                 | In 2-3       |                   |
|                 | Symptom check   | months,      |                   |
|                 |                 | repeat SPEP, |                   |
|                 | SPEP, FLC, CBC, | FLC, CBC,    |                   |
|                 | BMP             | BMP          |                   |
|                 |                 |              |                   |
|                 |                 | Yearly       |                   |
|                 |                 | skeletal     |                   |
|                 |                 | survey       |                   |
+-----------------+-----------------+--------------+-------------------+

Multiple Myeloma (MM)

Evaluation

-   Diagnosis requires clonal bone marrow plasma cells ≥10% or
    bony/extramedullary plasmacytoma AND one or more end-organ event
    (CRAB criteria) or biomarker of myeloma

-   CRAB criteria

-   Hypercalcemia, renal impairment, anemia, bone osteolytic lesions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Biomarkers of multiple myeloma

-   Clonal bone marrow plasma cells ≥ 60%

-   Serum FLC ratio ≥ 100 or ≤ 0.01

-   \>1 focal lesion ≥ 5mm on MRI

-   Skeletal imaging: whole-body PET-CT or CT preferred, MRI, bone
    survey (x-ray)

Management

-   First-line induction therapy typically is RVd: immunomodulatory
    agent (lenalidomide \[[R]{.underline}evlimid\]), proteasome
    inhibitor (bortezomib \[[V]{.underline}elcade\]) and dexamethasone

-   Consolidation therapy includes autologous SCT for transplant
    eligible pts

-   Maintenance therapy is often given indefinitely, typically
    lenalidomide or bortezomib

-   Relapsed disease is often treated with anti-CD38 monoclonal Ab
    (daratumumab) with a steroid and either immunomodulatory drug or
    proteosome inhibitor; CAR-T also recently approved for relapsed MM

-   Supportive Care

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   VTE prophylaxis with DOAC or LMWH if on an immunomodulatory agent
    with 2 VTE risk factors; if only 0-1 VTE risk factors 🡪 aspirin

-   EPO and G-CSF for treatment-related anemia and neutropenia

-   Bisphosphonate (ideally zoledronic acid) to reduce risk of
    fractures; analgesia ± radiotherapy for bone pain and palliation

-   (Val)acyclovir if on bortezomib for VZV prophylaxis

Lymphoplasmacytic Lymphoma/Waldenstrom Macroglobulinemia (IgM)

Presentation

-   Hyperviscosity syndrome: blurred vision, dizziness, diplopia,
    hypoxia, ataxia, vertigo, stroke, coma

-   Peripheral neuropathy

-   Retinal changes: dilated veins, hemorrhages, papilledema

-   Cryoglobulinemia: large IgM complexes precipitate out in the cold,
    causing Raynaud\'s, urticaria, purpura, acral cyanosis, tissue
    necrosis

Evaluation

-   Requires: IgM monoclonal gammopathy on SPEP, BM biopsy with ≥10%
    lymphocytes with plasmacytoid differentiation (late stage B-cell
    differentiation), and MYD88 mutation

-   CBC, coagulation studies, cryoglobulins, IgM, β2-microglobulin

-   Serum viscosity: If \<4 symptoms are rare, If \>6 typically
    symptomatic.

Management

-   Asymptomatic pts managed with close observation

-   Symptomatic hyperviscosity is treated with plasmapheresis

-   Induction: may include bendamustine ± rituximab if IgM level is
    \<4000 (rituximab can temporarily ↑ IgM and ↑ risk of hyperviscosity
    syndrome)

-   Monitor response with: IgM levels, monoclonal IgM on SPEP

Other Plasma Cell Dyscrasias

Light Chain (AL) Amyloidosis

-   Extracellular deposition of misfolded light chains (most commonly
    kidney and heart)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Features: nephrotic syndrome, restrictive cardiomyopathy, peripheral
    neuropathy, HSM, macroglossia, easy bruising/bleeding,
    dysautonomia/orthostasis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diagnosis

-   Need ALL 4: amyloid related systemic syndrome, positive congo red
    staining on any tissue, evidence that amyloid is light chain
    related, evidence of monoclonal plasma cell disorder

POEMS Syndrome

-   Cause unknown, possibly chronic overproduction of pro-inflammatory
    cytokines such as VEGF

-   Features: Polyneuropathy, Organomegaly, Endocrinopathy, Monoclonal
    protein (usually λ light chain), Skin changes

-   Diagnosis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mandatory criteria: peripheral neuropathy, monoclonal plasma cell
    disorder

-   Major criteria (need 1/3): osteosclerotic lesions, VEGF, Castleman
    disease

-   Minor criteria (need 1/6): organomegaly, volume overload,
    endocrinopathy, skin changes, papilledema, thrombocytosis or
    polycythemia

Castleman Disease

-   Angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia

-   Antibodies to HHV-8 implicated in \>50% of cases

-   Features: lymphadenopathy, fever, night sweats, fatigue, fluid
    accumulation, violaceous lymph node biopsy w/characteristic
    hematopathology papules

Myeloproliferative Neoplasms (MPNs) -- Christina Snider

Background

-   MPNs: chronic myeloid disorders caused by abnormal proliferation of
    mature bone marrow cell lineages (granulocytes, erythrocytes, or
    megakaryocytes)

-   MPNs differ from myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS); cells in MPNs are
    normally developed (i.e. not dysplastic)

-   Four "classic" MPNs: polycythemia vera, essential thrombocythemia,
    primary myelofibrosis and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)

Polycythemia Vera (PV)

Background

-   Polycythemia is a general term: Men = Hb/Hct \> 16.5/49%; Women =
    Hb/Hct \> 16/48%

-   Relative polycythemia: concentrated H/H due to decreased plasma
    volume

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diuretic use, vomiting, diarrhea; H/H should normalize with fluid
    resuscitation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Absolute polycythemia: increased RBC mass

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Primary polycythemia: inherited/acquired mutation in RBC progenitor

-   Secondary polycythemia: increase in RBC mass due to elevated serum
    EPO

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hypoxia/cardiopulmonary associated (chronic pulmonary disease,
    R-to-L cardiac shunts, sleep apnea, obesity hypoventilation
    syndrome, chronic carbon monoxide poisoning, including heavy
    smoking)

-   Kidney associated causes (following renal transplant, renal artery
    stenosis, hydronephrosis)

-   Autonomous EPO production from an EPO-producing tumors (rare)

-   Steroid Use

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Epidemiology: Median age of diagnosis is 60 years; 25% cases present
    at age \<50 years.

-   \>95% PV pts have JAK2 V617F mutation, but JAK2 V617F mutation is
    not specific to PV and can be seen in other MPNs

Presentation

-   Incidentally elevated H/H

-   Splenomegaly, generalized pruritus (post-warm bath/shower), unusual
    thrombosis

-   Erythromelalgia: intermittent occurrence of red, hot, painful
    extremities

Evaluation

-   CBC w/ diff and peripheral smear

-   EPO level

-   Rule out secondary causes: sleep study, carboxyhemoglobin, steroids

-   Peripheral blood screen for JAK2 V617F mutation

Management

-   PV treatment aims to prevent thrombosis and bleeding events.

-   Phlebotomy: maintain Hct \<45% (one unit 500 mL decreases Hct by 3%)

-   ASA 81 mg for thrombosis prevention and symptom control

-   Hydroxyurea: indicated for high-risk pts (\>60 years old or with
    history of thrombosis)

-   Interferon-alfa, busulfan, or ruxolitinib: indicated in select
    high-risk pts

Essential Thrombocythemia (ET)

Background

-   Clonal stem cell disorder with increased platelet counts (\>450k/uL)

-   Risks of thrombosis and hemorrhage

-   Median age of diagnosis: 60 years. Twice as common in females.

Presentation

-   Incidental thrombocytosis on CBC

-   Splenomegaly, unusual thrombosis, and erythromelalgia

Evaluation

-   Screen for conditions that cause reactive thrombocytosis: chronic
    inflammatory diseases, infections, bleeding/hemolysis, iron
    deficiency, post splenectomy

-   CBC with smear (platelet anisocytosis) ranging from very small to
    giant platelets

-   CMP, LDH, uric ascid, iron studies

-   BCR ABL1 testing should be sent to exclude CML

-   Bone marrow bx with staining, cytogenetics, and molecular testing
    for JAK2, CALR, MPL mutations

Management

-   Avoid ASA 81 in pts with platelet counts \>1 million complicated by
    acquired von Willebrand syndrome due to increased risk of bleeding

+----------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
| Treatment of   |                         |                           |
| ET             |                         |                           |
+================+=========================+===========================+
|  Risk Score    | Features                | Treatment                 |
|                |                         |                           |
| (IPS           |                         |                           |
| ET-thrombosis) |                         |                           |
+----------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
| High           | Hx of thrombosis and/or | cytoreduction (target plt |
|                | \>age 60 with JAK2      | 100-400k) with            |
|                | V617F mutation          | hydroxyurea, systemic     |
|                |                         | anticoagulation           |
|                |                         | ±antiplatelet agent       |
+----------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
| Intermediate   | Age \>60, no JAK2 V617F |                           |
|                | mutation, no history of |                           |
|                | thrombosis              |                           |
+----------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
| Low            | Age =\<60 w/ JAK2 V617F | observation vs. daily ASA |
|                | mutation and no history | 81                        |
|                | of thrombosis           |                           |
|                |                         |                           |
+----------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+
| Very Low       | Age =\<60, no JAK2      |                           |
|                | V617F mutation, no      |                           |
|                | history of thrombosis   |                           |
+----------------+-------------------------+---------------------------+

Primary Myelofibrosis (PMF)

Background

-   Clonal proliferation of myeloid cells with variable morphologic
    maturity resulting in reactive marrow fibrosis and extramedullary
    hematopoiesis

-   Least favorable prognosis out of MPN

Presentation

-   Fatigue, weight loss, low grade fever, bone pain, and night sweats

-   Marked splenomegaly ±hepatomegaly (due to extramedullary
    hematopoiesis)

Evaluation

-   Smear: teardrop shaped RBCs (dacrocytes)

-   Bone marrow biopsy: "dry tap" due to extensive reticulin and/or
    collagen fibrosis mutually exclusive mutations in JAK2, MPL, or CALR

Management

-   Low risk pts: observe if asymptomatic

-   Cure by allogenic HCT transplantation in young, high-risk pts

-   Treatment of anemias include transfusion support

-   Surgical splenectomy if abdominal pain or transfusion dependent
    anemia (used very infrequently)

Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML)

Background

-   Definition: MPN characterized by the overproduction of myeloid stem
    cells that can differentiate

-   Chronic phase:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fatigue, weight loss, bleeding

-   Abdominal fullness and early satiety due to splenomegaly

-   WBC typically \>100k. Smear shows neutrophilic cells in all stages
    of maturation with \<2% blasts

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Accelerated phase: Refractory leukocytosis, 10-19% blasts in
    peripheral blood or bone marrow, worsening peripheral basophilia,
    thrombocytopenia

-   Blast phase = acute leukemia: \>20% blasts in peripheral blood or
    bone marrow, extramedullary proliferation of blasts

Evaluation

-   Typical findings in blood and bone marrow and confirmation of
    Philadelphia chromosome (BCR-ABL1 fusion gene) via conventional
    cytogenetics, FISH, or rt-PCR

Management

-   Hydroxyurea can be used to reduce WBC while awaiting confirmation

-   Oral tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI): Imatinib, dasatinib,
    nilotinib, and ponatinib

-   Allogenic hematopoietic cell transplantation: curative option for
    pts in accelerated and blast phase, as well as young pts with
    chronic phase CML who do not respond to TKI therapy

Bone Marrow Transplant -- Chelsie Sievers

Background

-   Donor selection

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Autologous: self, no matching required (no GVHD risk, but also no
    graft-vs-tumor effect)

-   Allogeneic: non-self, matching based on HLA (more matched = less
    GVHD risk)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Matched-related donor (MRD): fully matched sibling

-   Matched-unrelated donor (MUD): from NMDP database

-   Haploidentical: half matched sibling or parent

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Source of stem cells:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs) vs. bone marrow-derived cells vs
    umbilical cord

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Conditioning regimens:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Myeloablative vs. reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   GVHD prophylaxis (for allo-SCT)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Regimen varies: can include tacrolimus, MMF, MTX, or thymo and
    alemtuzumab during conditioning

    Complications/Adverse Effects:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infectious

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Neutropenic fever, neutropenic enterocolitis (typhlitis)

-   Bacterial infections

-   Viral infections

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CMV: check weekly PCR levels post-allo-SCT

    -   All CMV+ recipients are treated with letermovir prophylactically
        regardless of donor status

-   EBV: check weekly PCR levels post allo-SCT. If EBV VL \>1000 on two
    occasions, can treat with pre-emptive rituximab to reduce the risk
    of PTLD

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Invasive fungal infections (e.g. aspergillus, candida)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-infectious

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, mucositis, cytopenias

-   Hepatic veno-occlusive disease (VOD)/sinusoidal obstructive syndrome
    (SOS)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pathophysiology: sinusoidal endothelial cell damage from
    conditioning chemo 🡪 post-sinusoidal portal HTN 🡪 cytokine release 🡪
    multiorgan failure and death

-   Diagnosis: total bili \>2, hepatomegaly/RUQ pain, weight gain \>
    2-5%

-   Evaluation: RUQ U/S with doppler

-   Treatment: Per heme attending; generally supportive, consider
    defibrotide

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Graft failure:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Primary: persistent neutropenia without engraftment

-   Secondary: delayed pancytopenia 2/2 immune phenomena or infection
    after engraftment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Engraftment syndrome:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pathophysiology: PMN recovery 🡪 cytokine storm vascular leak

-   Symptoms: fever, tachycardia, hypotension, SOB, pulmonary edema,
    rash, weight gain, bone pain, confusion

-   Diagnosis: clinical

-   Treatment: high-dose IV steroids

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Idiopathic pneumonia syndrome (IPS)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Umbrella term that also includes peri-engraftment respiratory
    distress syndrome (PERDS) and diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH)

-   Pathophysiology: Lung injury from conditioning 🡪 cytokines 🡪
    recruitment of alloreactive T cells 🡪 progressive lung injury
    resembling ARDS

-   Diagnosis: multi-lobar airspace opacities and hypoxia in absence of
    infection

-   Evaluation: imaging, bronchoscopy with BAL

-   Management: Prednisone 1-2 mg/kg or pulse 1g/d x3 days; etanercept
    2nd line

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute GVHD

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Only in allogenic; increased risk with more HLA mismatch

-   Pathophysiology: donor T cells attack recipient (Th1-mediated)

-   Symptoms: skin rash, cholestatic liver injury, diarrhea

-   Treatment: IV steroids (methylprednisolone 1-2mg/kg x 5d)

    -   If refractory: mycophenolate, etanercept, ruxolitinib,
        antithymocyte globulin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Chronic GVHD (typically after T+100)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can involve all organs but typically see a scleroderma-like picture
    (xerophthalmia, xerostomia dysphagia, arthritis, skin changes, malar
    rash, obliterative bronchiolitis, cholestatic liver injury,
    cytopenias)

-   Treatment: Steroids (also photophoresis for skin), Consider trials
    of ruxolitinib, ibrutinib, rituximab if refractor,

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pathophysiology: B-cell proliferative disease typically from latent
    EBV

-   Symptoms: fever, weight loss, fatigue, lymphadenopathy, extra-nodal
    masses, ↑ EBV PCR

CAR T-cell Therapy -- Chelsie Sievers

Background

-   Chimeric antigen receptor T cells (CAR-T) are a type of autologous
    T-cell therapy collected from the pt and genetically modified to
    contain an extracellular tumor-specific antigen target linked to the
    internal component of the T-cell receptor.

-   Goal: Pt\'s own T-cells can specifically target the tumor cell
    population.

-   FDA approved therapies: Kymriah (CD19), Abecema (BCMA), Breyanzi
    (CD19), Tecartus (CD19), Yescarta (CD19)

Complications:

-   Cytokine release syndrome

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pathophysiology: Supraphysiologic immune cell response with release
    of inflammatory cytokines.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Grade 1: fever ≥ 100.4, no hypotension, no hypoxia

-   Grade 2: fever ≥ 100.4, hypotension not requiring vasopressors
    and/or hypoxia requiring \< 6L

-   Grade 3: fever ≥ 100.4, hypotension requiring a vasopressor, hypoxia
    requiring \> 6L or non-rebreather

-   Grade 4: fever ≥ 100.4, hypotension requiring multiple vasopressors,
    hypoxia requiring positive pressure

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Work-up: blood and urine cultures (IV abx if needed)

-   Treatment:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ICU transfer (grade 1 okay for floor)

-   Acetaminophen for fever

-   Tocilizumab 8 mg/kg IV (max 800mg; up to 3 doses in 24 hours, 8
    hours apart)

-   Dexamethasone 10 mg IV q 6 hours (grade 3-4)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Immune effector cell-associated neurotoxicity syndrome: ICANS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pathophysiology: high systemic inflammation 🡪 leaky blood brain
    barrier 🡪 encephalopathy ± cerebral edema

-   Based on ICE score: Orientation: orientation to year, month, city,
    hospital (4 points); Naming: ability to name 3 objects (e.g. point
    to clock, pen, button) (3 points); following commands: ability to
    follow simple commands (e.g. "Show me 2 fingers" or "Close your eyes
    and stick out your tongue") (1 point); writing: ability to write a
    standard sentence (e.g. "Our national bird is the bald eagle") (1
    point); attention: ability to count backwards from 100 by 10 (1
    point)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Grade 1: ICE score: 7-9

-   Grade 2: ICE score: 3-6

-   Grade 3: ICE score 0-2

-   Grade 4: ICE score 0

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Work-up: Neuro consult, fundoscopic exam for papilledema, consider
    MRI brain w/and w/o contrast, consider EEG, consider non-con CT head
    if headache/lethargy.

-   Treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   q4hr neuro checks (q1hr if grade \> 2 → ICU transfer)

-   Keep Na 135-145 with hypertonic saline if necessary (Na 145-150 if
    grade 4)

-   Consider thiamine supplementation 500mg q8hr

-   Steroids

    -   Grade 2-3: dexamethasone 10 mg q 6 hours (if seizure give 20mg x
        1, then 10mg q6hrs)

    -   Grade 4: methylprednisolone 1000 mg IV q 24 x 3 days

Oncologic Emergencies -- Alex DeWeerd

Leukostasis

Definition: Hyperleukocytosis is a WBC count \>100,000/microL most
commonly in a patient with leukemia. Leukostasis is hyperleukocytosis +
clinical symptoms of decreased tissue perfusion in end organs (CNS,
lungs, heart, kidneys, etc)

Pathophysiology: Leukostasis is thought to be due to increased blood
viscosity caused by a large population of leukemic blasts that are less
deformable than mature leukocytes. As blasts increase in the blood,
plugs of these more rigid cells form in the microcirculation and impede
flow. The blast-endothelial cell interactions lead to endothelial cell
damage, cytokine release, and subsequent hemorrhage and local hypoxemia
within tissues most notably the CNS and lungs.

Presentation

-   Primarily occurs with AML and ALL. This is not common with CLL or
    CML, which present with high leukocyte counts in the absence of a
    significant increased portion of peripheral blasts

-   Respiratory: dyspnea, hypoxia (note CXR can show diffuse
    interstitial or alveolar infiltrates or may be normal)

-   PaO2 by ABG often falsely low from WBC consuming O2 in vitro. Trust
    SpO2.

-   CNS: headache, AMS, vision changes, dizziness, tinnitus, gait
    instability, neuro deficit

Evaluation

-   CBC w/ diff and peripheral blood smear

-   Imaging: CT head to evaluate neuro deficit and to check for ICH

-   Chest X-Ray vs. CT chest to evaluate dyspnea and air space
    abnormalities

Management

-   Call Hematology

-   Emergent cytoreduction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Leukapheresis: page Nephrology and place dialysis catheter.

-   Hydroxyurea and chemotherapy per hematology fellow

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Transfer/admit to ICU

Tumor Lysis Syndrome (TLS)

Background

-   Lysis of malignant cells either spontaneously or in response to
    chemotherapy causing release of K, Phos, nucleic acids, and
    cytokines

-   Consequences:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hyperkalemia: most urgent and immediately life threatening

-   Hyperphosphatemia: binds Ca and leads to CaPhos crystal deposition 🡪
    AKI, HypoCa

-   Hyperuricemia (from breakdown of DNA) 🡪 precipitation in renal
    tubules 🡪 AKI

-   Hypocalcemia: can cause mental status changes, neuromuscular
    irritability/spasms

-   Hypotension, AKI from cytokine release

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TLS labs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Uric acid ≥ 8, Ca2+ ≤ 7, K+ ≥ 6, or PO43- ≥ 4.5 OR

-   \> 25% change from baseline in these values

Evaluation

-   Risk Stratification:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Highest risk after starting chemotherapy, but can occur
    spontaneously

-   Highest risk if rapidly progressive, chemo-sensitive, myelo or
    lymphoproliferative disease; bulky disease, extensive organ/marrow
    infiltration

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tumor characteristics which confer a higher risk of developing TLS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High (\>5% risk): ALL (WBC\> 100K or LDH 2x ULN), AML (WBC\> 100K),
    Burkitt's (III/IV or LDH≥2xULN, DLBCL with bulky disease,
    intermediate risk + AKI/CKD

-   Intermediate: ALL (WBC\<100K, LDH \<2x ULN), AML (WBC 25-100K),
    Burkitt's LDH\<2x ULN), DLBCL (non-bulky, LDH\>ULN), CLL (if tx with
    fludarabine, rituximab, lenalidomide, or venetoclax +LN 5-10 cm or
    ALC≥25K), plasma cell leukemia, rare chemo-sensitive solid tumors
    (small cell)

-   Low: all others

Management

-   Prevention:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High risk: q6-8h TLS labs, IVF (±loop diuretic if volume overload),
    allopurinol, ± rasburicase

-   Intermediate -- q8h TLS labs, IVF, allopurinol

-   Low -- daily TLS labs, IVF

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IVF: goal to maintain UOP 80-100 mL/hr

-   Allopurinol: 300 mg PO BID for CrCl \> 20 mL/min, UpToDate renal
    dosing if lower

-   Rasburicase (\$\$\$): contraindicated in G6PD (send G6PD if not
    urgent and AA, Asian or Jewish descent)

    -   Given if uric acid \> 8 mg/dL. Get fellow approval before
        ordering

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Treatment: (Can use as night/cross cover handoff)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   K+ \> 5.5: STAT EKG, lokelma 10g TID, 10 U insulin+ 1 amp D50

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If EKG changes, then calcium gluconate and D5W at 100 mL/hr with
    repeat BG in 1 hr

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Uric acid \> 8 with 25% change from baseline: page hematology fellow
    to discuss rasburicase

-   PO4 \> 4.5 with 25% change from baseline: start/↑ phos binder
    (sevelamer)

-   IV calcium: do not administer unless symptomatic AND
    hyperphosphatemia is corrected

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   With high phos, IV calcium can lead to calcium deposition and renal
    failure

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hemodialysis: may be necessary if poor renal function and/or anuria.
    Consider Nephrology consultation early if worsening Cr, refractory
    symptoms, or refractory electrolyte abnormalities.

Superior Vena Cava (SVC) Syndrome

Background

-   Commonly associated malignancies: lung cancer (NSCLC or SCLC),
    Non-Hodgkin or Hodgkin lymphoma, mediastinal germ cell tumors,
    thymic malignancies

-   Partial or complete obstruction of the SVC impedes blood return from
    the upper extremities, head, neck, and brain resulting in upstream
    congestion

-   Can be secondary to a mass in the mediastinum or thrombosis (e.g.
    foreign body, central venous catheter)

Presentation

-   Facial or neck swelling without generalized edema

-   Sense of head fullness, exacerbated by leaning forward or lying down

-   Pulmonary: dyspnea, stridor, hoarseness, cough (due to edema
    narrowing the nasal passages and larynx or mechanical airway
    obstruction)

-   Physical exam

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Facial/neck edema particularly of the eye lids in the morning,
    distended neck and chest veins

-   Can also sometimes see upper extremity swelling, papilledema,
    plethora

-   Look for associated lymph node enlargement anywhere particularly
    including supraclavicular, cervical, and axillary region

Evaluation

-   CXR: may show mass, perihilar or mediastinal disease, mediastinal
    widening, or pleural effusion

-   Contrasted CT scan ± CT Venography: phased to get a view of clot
    contribution to obstruction to guide decision regarding
    anticoagulation or stenting

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Radiology attending can coordinate with techs (requires verbal
    direct request)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   MRI/MRV may provide additional information (often not possible due
    to pt too sick)

-   Non-malignant causes on the differential: post-radiation fibrosis,
    fibrosing mediastinitis (can be seen from prior infections such as
    histoplasma, TB, nocardiosis, aspergillus, blastomycosis), central
    AV fistula

Management

-   Assess airway and prepare for intubation if needed

-   Keep head of bed elevated

-   Thrombosis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Removal of lines/catheters associated with thrombus

-   Consideration of anticoagulation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tumor compression: the type of tumor guides treatment (tissue biopsy
    is key)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stat/urgent consultations:

-   Interventional radiology: possible stenting/dilatation (Fastest
    modality, if available)

-   Radiation oncology: radiation therapy (Takes days to weeks to work)

-   Medical oncology: help with diagnosis and chemotherapy (Fast if
    highly chemo-responsive cancer

-   Interventional pulmonology: help with tissue dx

Spinal Cord Compression

Background

-   Malignancies where cord compression is most common:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Multiple myeloma, lymphoma (both Hodgkin and NHL); lung, breast, and
    prostate cancer

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tumor mass, compression, and often displaced bone 🡪 occupies the
    epidural space and impinges the thecal sac or nerve roots of the
    spinal cord or any spinal nerves including the cauda equina. This
    can lead to edema of the spinal cord white and gray matter, which
    eventually leads to infarction of the cord. This vasogenic edema is
    where glucocorticoids can play a role.

Presentation

-   Back pain (most often initial symptom, typically worse at night),
    motor, or sensory deficits

-   Cauda equina syndrome: bowel or bladder incontinence, ataxia

Evaluation

-   Neurologic exam with sensation testing seeking level below an
    identified dermatome

-   Back pain that exacerbated by movement -\> mechanically unstable
    spine until proven otherwise (requires surgical evaluation and
    potential stabilization)

-   Lab testing: If no known malignancy check CBC, CMP, SPEP, and (in
    males) PSA

-   Bladder U/S if suspicion or retention with or without overflow
    incontinence

-   If suspected, order whole spine MRI w and w/o contrast. If pt unable
    to have MRI, CT myelography may be considered.

Management

-   Immediate high dose steroids: give dexamethasone to minimize
    mineralocorticoid effects. Most common dosing is 10mg IV x1 followed
    by 4mg PO or IV q6h

-   Consider stat/urgent consultation with:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Spine Team (Neurosurgery or Orthopedic surgery holds pager): consult
    early, ask for an operative plan from them ASAP. Affects other
    possible interventions.

-   Radiation oncology: one of the rare cases where overnight radiation
    would be considered. Requires that patient is able to lie flat for a
    CT simulation (rad onc orders this), and rad onc cannot proceed
    until Spine surgery makes a definitive call about whether or not to
    operate first

-   Medical oncology: help with diagnosis and chemotherapy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ensure regular neuro-vascular checks and close monitoring

Brain Metastases

Background

-   Common malignancies: Lung (NSCLC), breast, kidney, colorectal
    carcinomas, and melanomas

-   Significantly more common than primary brain tumors

-   80% of brain metastasis occur in the cerebrum at grey/white matter
    junction via hematogenous spread (smaller blood vessel diameter at
    the junction essentially traps tumor cells)

Presentation

-   Highly variable: must consider brain mets in any cancer pt with
    neurologic or behavioral changes

-   Headache: worse in the mornings, with bending over or with Valsalva

-   Nausea/vomiting

-   Cognitive dysfunction: changes in memory, mood or personality

-   Neuro: focal neurologic deficits, seizures, stroke (particularly
    melanoma, choriocarcinoma, thyroid, and renal carcinomas)

-   Signs of elevated ICP: papilledema, vision changes, drowsiness,
    presyncope

Evaluation

-   STAT CT if concerned for stroke or elevated ICP

-   MRI with contrast: most sensitive, can differentiate between
    metastases vs. other lesions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Suggestive features: multiple lesions, location, circumscribed
    margins, vasogenic edema, contrast enhancement

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If pt has no known primary tumor: consider CT C/A/P ± PET to
    identify primary

-   Biopsy with histopathology and IHC: if diagnosis in doubt or if only
    a single lesion is present

Management

-   If severe HA, N/V, focal neuro deficits: systemic glucocorticoids

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dexamethasone 10mg IV x1 followed by 4mg IV q6h (or PO if tolerated)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stat/urgent consults:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Neurosurgery: diagnostic/therapeutic intervention. Note they will
    need a tissue diagnosis ASAP if not known; except in cases of
    emergency; affects operative plan.

-   Radiation oncology: will also need tissue diagnosis, and will have
    to coordinate with neurosurgery about timing of surgery versus
    radiation. Patient must be able to lie flat; they will need a CT
    simulation if radiation is to be offered.

-   Medical oncology: help with diagnosis and chemotherapy. Evolving
    systemic therapies can be effective for controlling metastatic
    disease to the brain, particularly with melanoma and NSCLC subtypes
    (ALK, EGFR)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ensure regular neuro-vascular checks and close monitoring

-   Do not perform LP without input from neurology

Paraneoplastic Syndromes -- Bailey Decoursey, Justin Lo

Hypercalcemia of Malignancy

Background

-   Caused by PTHrP production, osteolytic lesions, and/or rarely
    exogenous Vit D

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PTHrP: breast cancer, NSCLC (squamous)

-   Osteolysis: multiple myeloma, Breast Cancer;

-   Exogenous vit D: lymphoma

Evaluation

-   Correct \[Ca2+\] for hypoalbuminemia: \[Ca2+\] + 0.8 x (4.0 --
    albumin)

-   Send basic hyperCa+2 work-up: PTH, vit D, etc (see "Hypercalcemia"
    section)

-   PTHrP is called "Parathyroid Hormone-related Peptide-ARUP" in Epic

Management

-   First line: IVF without calcium such as Normosol; goal urinary
    output of 150-200 mL/hr

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Strict I/Os: cautious IV fluids in pts with cardiac or renal
    dysfunction

-   Add Furosemide if hypervolemic (do not empirically start)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Second line: zoledronic acid 4mg IV (takes 24-48 hours to see
    effect)

-   AMS or severe hypercalcemia (\>14mg/dL): calcitonin 4 IU/kg
    (requires attending approval)

SIADH

Background

-   Euvolemic hypotonic hyponatremia with urine sodium \>20 and
    typically urine Osm \>100

-   Associated with: SCLC (most common), head/neck cancers, breast
    cancer

-   See \"Hyponatremia" section for additional information

Management

-   Free water restriction to 800mL/day

-   Refractory: salt supplementation (e.g. salt tabs) ± loop diuretic

Carcinoid Syndrome

Background

-   Episodic flushing, diarrhea, wheezing/SOB due to secretion of
    histamine & serotonin

-   Most common: Neuroendocrine tumors, GI (often with mets to liver and
    lung)

Evaluation

-   Urine: UR 5-HIAA (ARUP)

-   Imaging to identify tumor(s): CT C/A/P

Management

-   Short-term treatment: subQ or IV octreotide (see UpToDate for
    dosing)

-   Antidiarrheals (Imodium, Lomotil) to slow transit

-   Long-term treatment: depot (IM) forms of octreotide and lanreotide

Autoimmune Encephalitis, Encephalomyelitis, and Myelitis

Background

-   Encephalopathy (limbic or brainstem) ± myelitis (limb ataxia,
    sensory deficits)

-   Associated with small cell lung cancer and checkpoint inhibitor
    therapy

Evaluation

-   LP: make sure to order CSF oligoclonal bands and CSF IgG index

-   "Paraneoplastic AutoAb Eval-MAYO" (add \"CSF\" to the front of the
    order name if for LP)

-   NMDA-R can be ordered as a standalone test

-   CT head

-   EEG if concern for subclinical seizures

Management

-   Consult Neurology for possible immunosuppressive therapy (steroids,
    IVIG)

Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome (LEMS)

Background

-   Muscle weakness due to autoantibody against calcium channels
    resulting in ↓ ACh release

-   Associated with SCLC (most common) & lymphoma

-   See "Myasthenia Gravis (MG) and Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome
    (LEMS)" section in Neurology

Cancer of Unknown Primary -- Bailey Decoursey

Background

-   Cancer of unknown primary (CUP) accounts for 2% of all cancer
    diagnoses

-   Often, CUP is discovered incidentally on imaging tests or due to
    symptomatic metastasis

Presentation

-   Asymptomatic and found on imaging

-   Often generalized fatigue and weight loss

-   May have irregular, persistent lymphadenopathy at a particular site

Initial Evaluation

-   Physical exam: including pelvic / breast exam for females and
    prostate/testicular exam for males

-   CMP, CBC w/ diff, UA, PSA in males, fecal occult blood screening

-   CT C/A/P with contrast (reveals the origin in up to 35% of pts)

-   Once lesions are identified pt's should undergo biopsy of the most
    accessible lesion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If imaging is suggestive of GI origin, or pt has liver metastasis
    without other obvious dominant lesion, colonoscopy should be
    performed

-   If physical exam with breast abnormalities, or pt has axillary
    lymphadenopathy, bilateral mammography should be performed

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Breast MRI may be considered even in the setting of negative
    mammography if clinical suspicion is high

Evaluation following biopsy

-   Adenocarcinoma (70% of CUP)

-   Most common primary: pancreas, lung, liver, HPB tree, and kidney

-   Interestingly, prostate and breast cancer account for a small
    percentage of CUP despite being the most common malignancies

-   Most common metastasis: liver, lungs, lymph nodes and bones

-   Evaluation:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Primary is most likely to be identified by biopsy

-   If clinical suspicion is high for certain primary site, this should
    be relayed to pathology so they may perform appropriate staining

-   Tissue PSA can be positive even in the setting of normal serum PSA

-   Serum studies such as CEA, CA19-9, CA 125, CA15-3 are often not
    sensitive or specific and will often be elevated in the setting of
    many types of adenocarcinoma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Neuroendocrine tumors (1% of CUP)

-   High grade

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most common primary: lung (bronchogenic)

-   Most common metastasis: mediastinal and retroperitoneal LN

-   Evaluation: CT of chest ± bronchoscopy will likely identify site

-   If unrevealing, IHC staining and molecular cancer classifying assays
    will likely be helpful

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Squamous cell carcinoma (5% of CUP)

-   Work up depends on the location of adenopathy as follows:

-   Upper and mid-cervical lymphadenopathy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most common primary: head and neck cancer

-   Evaluation: CT head and neck, direct laryngoscopy, nasopharyngoscopy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lower cervical/supraclavicular lymphadenopathy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most common primary: lung or head and neck

-   Evaluation: CT chest, CT head and neck, direct laryngoscopy as
    indicated

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Inguinal lymphadenopathy

-   Most common primary: genital or anorectal origin

-   Evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Females: careful external and internal genital examination

-   Males: close external genital examination

-   Anoscopy and DRE in all pt

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In up to 60% of cases, a primary site may never be identified

-   Empiric chemotherapy may be initiated in consultation with medical
    oncology

Therapy Toxicities - Rahul Shah

Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor Toxicities

-   Immune checkpoint inhibitors augment the endogenous immune response
    against tumors, which may lead to autoimmune-like toxicities, known
    as immune-related adverse events (irAEs)

-   Treatment: low-dose glucocorticoids (prednisone, 0.5 mg/kg) for mild
    adverse events, high dose glucocorticoids (prednisone, 1-2 mg/kg)
    for severe adverse events

+---------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+
| Adverse Event Type  | Incidence with       | Incidence with          |
|                     | anti-CTLA-4          | anti‐PD1/PD‐L1          |
|                     |                      |                         |
|                     | (e.g. ipilimumab)    | (e.g. nivolumab,        |
|                     |                      | pembrolizumab)          |
+=====================+======================+=========================+
| Skin (rash,         | 30%                  | 30%                     |
| pruritus, TEN)      |                      |                         |
+---------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+
| Colitis             | 25%                  | 5%                      |
+---------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+
| Hypothyroidism      | 20%                  | 20%                     |
+---------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+
| Hepatitis           | 10%                  | 1%                      |
+---------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+
| Hypophysitis        | 10%                  | rare                    |
+---------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+
| Pneumonitis         | 2-5%                 | 2-5%                    |
+---------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+
| Myocarditis         | \<1%                 | \<1%                    |
+---------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+
| Neurotoxicity (GBS, | \<1%                 | \<1%                    |
| myasthenia gravis,  |                      |                         |
| encephalitis)       |                      |                         |
+---------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+

Cytotoxic Agent Toxicities

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Class              Agent                    Side Effect
  ------------------ ----------------------- --------------------------------
  Alkylating agents  busulfan                pulmonary fibrosis or diffuse
                                             alveolar hemorrhage

                     cyclophosphamide        myopericarditis, hemorrhagic
                                             cystitis (prevention: hydration;
                                             monitoring: daily UA, tx: mesna)

                     ifosfamide              encephalopathy (tx: methylene
                                             blue), nephrotoxicity,
                                             hemorrhagic cystitis

  Antimetabolites    5- Fluorouracil (5-FU)/ myelosuppression, coronary
                     Capecitabine            vasospasm, palmar-plantar
                     (metabolized to FU)     erythrodysesthesia, mucositis

                     cladribine, pentostatin dose reduced for CrCl

                     cytarabine (Ara-C)      irreversible cerebellar ataxia
                                             (if high dose, neuro checks
                                             required), conjunctivitis
                                             (prevent with prophylactic
                                             steroid eye drops)

                     gemcitabine             transient transaminitis,
                                             peripheral edema, rash, rarely:
                                             pulmonary toxicity, hemolytic
                                             uremic syndrome, capillary leak
                                             syndrome

                     methotrexate            stomatitis, hepatotoxicity,
                                             renal failure, high dose
                                             requires leucovorin

  Antitumor          anthracyclines          HFrEF (need TTE prior). Most
  antibiotics        (doxorubicin,           notable with doxorubicin.
                     daunorubicin,           
                     idarubicin)             

                     bleomycin               Pulmonary fibrosis. Potentiated
                                             with G-CSF

  Monoclonal         alemtuzumab             severe and prolonged cytopenias
  antibodies                                 

                     bevacizumab             HFrEF, HTN, hyperglycemia,
                                             hypomag, DVT, pulm hemorrhage,
                                             GI
                                             bleeding/fistulas/perforation,
                                             wound healing complications

                     rituximab               hypophos, hepatotoxicity, HBV
                                             reactivation (screen all pts),
                                             peripheral neuropathy;
                                             transfusion reaction during
                                             1^st^ time infusion

  Platinum agents    cisplatin, oxaliplatin, Nephrotoxicity, worst with
                     carboplatin             cisplatin. Rental tubular
                                             acidosis. Neurotoxicity
                                             (parasthesias, cold sensitivity,
                                             cramps, peripheral neuropathy),
                                             ototoxicity (high frequency
                                             hearing loss), constipation,
                                             hypomag

  Taxanes            docetaxel, paclitaxel   hypersensitivity reaction (often
                                             require premedication with
                                             steroids and H1/H2 blockers);
                                             peripheral neuropathy

  Topoisomerase      irinotecan, topotecan,  irinotecan- acute diarrhea can
  inhibitors         etoposide               be treated with atropine;
                                             delayed with atropine

  Tyrosine kinase    imatinib, dasatinib,    QTc prolongation, pulmonary
  inhibitors         nilotinib, bosutinib    effusion, hepatotoxicity

  Vinca alkaloid     vincristine             peripheral neuropathy and
                                             ototoxicity (vestibular system
                                             lost first)
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Indications for Inpt Radiation Oncology Consultation -- Jayden Gracie

Initial Considerations:

-   Is this really cancer? Must have a tissue diagnosis prior to
    consultation

-   Is problem urgent? Clinic opens at 7:30am, so do not consult until
    after 7:30am unless emergent

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Urgent conditions (Inpt consultation indicated, weekend treatment
    unlikely)

-   Rule of thumb: true emergencies (label consult, \'Urgent,\' may
    treat even on a weekend)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Spinal cord compression

-   Airway collapse from mass effect

-   Life-threating hemorrhage from mass

-   Symptomatic brain mets (seizures, FND, ect)

-   Anaplastic thyroid cancer

-   Pain crisis from bone metastases

-   Requiring rapid turnaround: keloids (post-surgical for keloid
    prevention), heterotopic ossification)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Everything else is generally treated outpt. Order an ambulatory
    referral for those pts.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For pts whose outpt radiation gets interrupted by admission, no need
    for consult. Page Rad-Onc to close the loop.

-   If in doubt, page Rad-Onc to discuss prior to placing consult.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Have non-radiation interventions been discussed with the
    team/consultants first?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Airway compromise: first consult IP/ENT for stent placement/trach

-   Cord compression or symptomatic brain mets: consult Neurosurgery for
    possible intervention

-   Spinal instability/pathologic fracture: calculate a Spinal
    Instability Neoplastic Score (SINS). If \>6, consult Spine to assess
    for instability and surgical candidacy. They must have an attested
    note prior to radiation planning. Not that radiation helps with
    tumor pain but does not help with instability or pain from the
    fractures themselves.

-   SVC syndrome: Consult IR for emergent percutaneous stent placement
    if 4\_ points on Kishi scoring system. Engage Med Onc since chemo
    has a faster effect (especially in SLCL) than radiation (days).
    Consider surgical consult if concerned for thymoma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Is the pt fit enough for radiation? Common precluding factors:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pt is too unstable

-   Cannot lie flat or stay still for 10 min of treatment, 30min-45min
    for planning (delirium, dyspnea, uncontrolled pain, seizing)

-   Head/neck radiation requires a facemask; claustrophobia should be
    addressed prior (benzos)

    Pre-consultation workup:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Brain mets

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If symptomatic, dexamethasone 10mg IV load followed by 4mg q6
    thereafter (with PPI). Rad onc can help with taper plan. Do not stop
    during active treatments.

-   MRI with and without, labelled \'Cmelak Sequence\' in comments
    section. May also be a \'For Radiation Planning\' box.

-   CSF sampling if suspicious of leptomeningeal spread

-   DO NOT stop keppra If already onboard for seizures.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Spine mets

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Damage becomes irreversible around 48 hours from symptom onset. Do
    not delay treatment and consultation (spine, rad onc, ect).

-   STAT MRI with and without contrast.

-   Dexamethasone 10mg IV load followed by 4mg q6 thereafter (with PPI).
    Rad onc can help with taper plan. Do not stop during active
    treatments.

    Logistical Considerations

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Treatment planning takes several days to plan except in
    urgent/emergent circumstances.

-   Rad-Onc arranges ALL TRANSPORT for their pts. No need for primary
    team to do anything.

-   Pts must get a "CT sim" image in Rad-Onc department before starting
    any treatment.

-   Let Rad-Onc know if pts are going for other procedures/imaging on a
    treatment day, or if pt is refusing treatment.

-   Radiation plans cannot be transferred into or out of the Vanderbilt
    system. Let Rad-Onc know a few days in advance if transfers between
    Vanderbilt centers will be needed.

-   Pts cannot get radiation at 90% SNFs. Radiation must be completed
    prior to dispo.

-   Most CLCs do not transfer pts back and forth to radiation
    treatments, so if planning to discharge to CLC, radiation needs to
    be finished inpt or start after the CLC.

-   In general, most curative RT treatments take several weeks. Most
    palliative regimens take 1-10d.

    Radiation at the VA

-   Pts need prior authorization before Rad-Onc is allowed to see VA pts
    at VUMC. To obtain PA, consult Med Onc and email Dr. York (medical
    oncologist at the VA). This may take a couple days. For Emergent
    cases, you do NOT have to wait on the PA. Rad-Onc can arrange for
    transport.

-   Rad-Onc attendings do not have access to the VA system. Notes will
    be in VUMC system.

Radiation Toxicity -- Jayden Gracie

Radiation pneumonitis

-   6 weeks to 6 months after RT to chest

-   Presents like pneumonia with cough and SOB, so need to rule out PNA

-   Imaging: chest X-ray or CT

-   Treatment: steroids

    Radiation dermatitis

-   Onset during or shortly after treatment

-   Variable: redness, dry desquamation (peeling, dry skin), or wet
    desquamation (blistering and oozing)

-   Treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Aquaphor or Aquaphor + lidocaine

-   Lidocaine can sometimes burn over wet desquamation. For wet
    desquamation (especially if looks potentially infected), start on
    Silvadene until it dries up. Then add non-adhesive barrier
    dressings.

-   Topical corticosteroids are helpful for itching (e.g. OTC
    hydrocortisone)

-   Sitz baths and peri bottles useful for perineal skin reaction after
    RT to chest.

    Mucositis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Salt water and baking soda rinses to help clear debris out of mouth.

-   Magic mouthwash, swish and spit if mouth only (as many times a day
    as they want) or swish and swallow up to every 4h. Can give viscous
    lidocaine if pt prefers.

-   For weight loss \>15lbs during treatments: consider G-tube but want
    to avoid if possible since slows swallowing function recovery

-   Can try soft or liquid diet, protein drinks

-   For esophagitis, can order carafate liquid formulation (to coat
    esophagus). May require prior auth, indication is radiation
    esophagitis. Consider PPI

    Secretions and mouth dryness

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Glycopyrrolate or Mucinex can help with thick secretions but can be
    drying.

-   Baking soda and salt, sugarless gum

-   Can try Levsin, scopolamine patches.

-   Nausea

-   Evaluate for and treat constipation, secretions, and acid reflux

-   Zofran is 1st line followed by compazine

    Pain flairs

-   Present with treatment of bony mets in up to 40% of pts. Spikes in
    pain usually occur either toward the end of treatment or a few days
    after due to inflammation.

-   Treat with steroid taper per Rad-Onc

    Radiation-associated dysuria

-   Presents with UTI-like symptoms during treatment.

-   Rule out UTI

-   Treatment: Hydration. Can try NSAIDs and phenazopyridine (note urine
    color change). Consider short steroid course next.

    Bowel toxicity

-   Upper: nausea/vomiting, loose/watery stools.

-   Lower: loose/watery stools, cramping, tenesmus, urgency

-   Treatment: Try low residue diet, anti-diarrheal agents (Imodium,
    Lomotil), sucralfate, protozoa/5-ASA enemas

-   Consider cessation or break of RT

Hepatology

Editor: Ahmad Yanis, MD

Reviewed by: Manhal J. Izzy, MD

Cirrhosis Overview -- Ahmad Yanis

Background

![](media/image24.png){width="3.75in" height="0.40625in"}

-   Example 1-liner: 65yo M with cirrhosis due to HCV decompensated by
    ascites and HE (MELD 25) who is listed for transplant and followed
    by Dr. Izzy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Etiology of cirrhosis: HCV\>HBV, EtOH, NASH, Wilson's,
    hemochromatosis, A1AT deficiency, autoimmune hepatitis, PSC, PBC,
    congestive hepatopathy (right heart failure), medication-induced

-   Complications that cause decompensation: overt ascites (or hepatic
    hydrothorax), overt hepatic encephalopathy (HE), esophageal variceal
    hemorrhage (EVH)

-   Always calculate daily MELD-Na scores (predicts 3 mo survival based
    on Tbili, Cr, INR, Na)

Evaluation

-   Goals: establish etiology, evaluate/treat complications, determine
    prognosis, and consider transplant evaluation

-   History:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Symptoms suggesting decompensation: confusion, sleep disturbances,
    abdominal swelling, lower extremity edema, scleral icterus/jaundice,
    pruritus, easy bruising/bleeding (skin, mouth, GI tract), dyspnea

-   Social history: EtOH and drug use hx, date of last drink, average \#
    of drinks/day, duration of EtOH use, prior rehab, hx of DUI, if
    there has been continued EtOH use despite knowledge of liver
    disease; these factors all impact transplant candidacy

-   Ascites: compliance with diuretics, compliance with salt
    restriction, frequency of paracentesis (volume removed, date of last
    para), h/o SBP, hx of TIPs

-   HE: compliance with lactulose, \# of BMs per day, any potential
    triggers (see HE section)

-   GIB/EVH: hematemesis, coffee ground emesis, melena, hematochezia
    (duration, volume, \# of bleeding episodes), last EGD (varices,
    banding) and colonoscopy, compliance with non-selective BBs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Physical exam: asterixis, ascites, edema/anasarca, splenomegaly,
    muscle wasting, gynecomastia, testicular atrophy, palmar erythema,
    spider angiomata, scleral icterus/jaundice, petechiae/ecchymoses,
    caput medusa, Terry's nails

-   Labs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Initial Workup: CMP, CBC, Coags, UA, HCV/HBV, Fe studies, PEth

-   Unless requested by hepatology, defer to outpatient: AFP, ANA, IgG,
    A1AT, ceruloplasmin, AMA (PBC), ASMA (AIH), anti-SLA (AIH), anti-LKM
    (AIH)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Imaging:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Abdominal US with duplex unless done in past 6 months or indication
    for repeating sooner (concern for new portal vein thrombosis)

-   For transplant eval, needs triple phase CT A/P (contrasted study,
    arterial and venous phases) or MRI abdomen with contrast

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Liver biopsy: gold standard for cirrhosis diagnosis but is not
    always needed if clinical presentation, labs, and imaging consistent
    with cirrhosis

Lab abnormalities

-   Hyponatremia (see hyponatremia section below)

-   Cirrhotic coagulopathy (increased INR): due to ↓ coagulation factor
    production

-   Thrombocytopenia: due to splenic sequestration, ↓ TPO production

-   Hypoalbuminemia: indications for 25% albumin transfusion -- SBP
    (1.5g/kg on day 1, 1g/kg on day 3), LVP (6-8g/L of ascites), HRS
    (albumin challenge: 1g/kg/day with max 100 g/day x 2 days), hypoNa
    \<125 and refractory to fluid restriction

Management

-   Nutrition: high protein diet, 2g Na restriction (if ascites
    present),

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider MVI, folate, thiamine (particularly in pts with EtOH use
    disorder)

-   Mediterranean diet for NASH

-   Fluid restriction if hyponatremic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Immunizations: ensure UTD with HBV/HAV, PPSV23, Prevnar, Flu,
    COVID-19 vaccines

-   Consider consulting Addiction Psych and Social Work for pts with
    EtOH use disorder - can assist with arranging Intensive Outpatient
    Program (IOP), Alcoholics Anonymous (AA)

-   General screenings include HCC screening (q6 months), EVH screening
    (see section below), monitor for other decompensations and treat
    accordingly, monitor MELD and consider transplant evaluation when
    \>15

-   Refer to hepatology outpatient

Medication Tips

-   Pain: 2g limit Tylenol, No NSAIDs, limit sedating medications
    especially with HE.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tramadol 25-50mg generally safe to use

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pruritus: Sarna lotion, can spot dose antihistamines. Can discuss
    with pharmacist/attending about starting sertraline, cholestyramine
    (interacts with many medications), or rifampin.

-   Anxiety/insomnia: hydroxyzine, avoid benzodiazepines

-   If needed for EtOH withdrawal, use lorazepam (Ativan) instead of
    chlordiazepoxide (Librium) or diazepam (Valium) due to its shorter
    half life

Liver Transplant (LT) Workup -- Katelyn Backhaus

Background

-   Model for End-stage Liver Disease (MELD-Na) score: initially
    developed to predict survival following TIPS placement, though is
    now used to objectively rank patients in terms of priority for liver
    transplant (LT)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Factors in total bilirubin, creatinine, INR, and Na.

-   Exception points given for complications like HCC and
    hepatopulmonary syndrome (HPS), leading to score in mid to high 20's
    even if biologic MELD is low

-   Highest score lasts for 7 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Listing a pt for LT is determined by a multidisciplinary transplant
    committee

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute liver failure pts take precedence over decompensated cirrhosis
    pts for LT

  ------------------------------ ----------------------------------------
  **Indications**                **Contraindications\***

  Cirrhosis with MELD ≥ 15 or    Ongoing substance abuse (must have
  evidence of decompensation     documented abstinence ≥ 3 mos) -- refer
  (ascites, variceal bleed, HE,  to exception policy in Alcoholic
  HPS, portopulmonary HTN)       Hepatitis section

  Acute liver failure            Untreated or recurrent malignancy or
                                 metastatic disease

  HCC that meets Milan criteria  Active infection, AIDS (CD4 \<200)

  Pts with early hilar           Documented history of medical
  cholangio-carcinoma that meets noncompliance
  specific criteria              

  Other rare diseases (e.g.,     Lack of adequate social support
  familial amyloid               
  polyneuropathy or              
  hyperoxaluria)                 

                                 Anatomic contraindications: chronic
                                 cardiac/pulmonary conditions that
                                 significantly increase perioperative
                                 risk (e.g., severe pulm HTN)

                                 Fulminant hepatic failure with sustained
                                 ICP \>50mmHg or CPP \<40mmHg

                                 Class III Obesity (BMI\>40) is a
                                 relative contraindication (class 2B)

  *\* Advanced age (\>70) is not 
  itself a contraindication but  
  candidates \>70 should be      
  almost free of comorbidities   
  to be considered*              
  ------------------------------ ----------------------------------------

![Figure 2.](media/image25.jpg){width="2.95620406824147in"
height="2.629550524934383in"}

Evaluation

-   Abdominal CT (triple phase) or MRI (multiphase with contrast) to
    evaluate for hepatic malignancy and vascular anatomy

-   Infectious workup: TB testing, HIV, RPR, VZV, CMV, EBV, and
    Hepatitis A, B, and C

-   Cardiac evaluation:

-   If RVSP \> 40mmHg on TTE, then R Heart Catheterization is indicated

-   PFT's, carotid US

-   Panorex to identify dental disease; consult OMFS pending results

-   Appropriate cancer screenings (CXR in all patients, CT Chest in
    prior/current smokers, colonoscopy, pap smear, mammogram, and PSA if
    applicable)

-   DEXA scan (osteoporosis in up to 55% of individuals with cirrhosis)

-   Certification of completion of intensive outpatient program (IOP)
    for substance abuse

-   Evaluation by hepatobiliary surgical team after obtaining cross
    sectional imaging

-   Psychosocial evaluation (consult Psychiatry, social work)

-   Current VUMC policy: pts should be abstinent from alcohol for no
    less than 3-6 months, although exceptions may be made for early
    liver transplant based on a very strict protocol. Discuss exception
    criteria with attending if suspect patient unlikely to survive
    hospitalization without transplant

Both living and deceased donor transplants are offered at VUMC. Donor
evaluation, however, cannot be started before the potential recipient is
deemed a candidate. Of note, should consider possible simultaneous
liver-kidney transplantation for 1) CKD \<30mL/min after \> 90 days of
eGFR\<60 or 2) AKI dependent on dialysis \>8 weeks or if extensive
glomerulosclerosis present.

Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis (SBP) -- Bailey DeCoursey

Background

-   Infection of ascitic fluid without evidence of a surgical
    intra-abdominal source

-   Present in approximately 1/3 of patients with cirrhosis who are
    hospitalized

-   Presentation: fever, abdominal pain, encephalopathy, renal failure,
    acidosis, and/or leukocytosis

-   Pathophysiology: Combination of GI bacterial flora overgrowth,
    reduced liver protein production (low complement levels), impaired
    phagocytic cell function leading to inability to clear pathogens

Evaluation

-   Any pt with cirrhosis and ascites who is admitted should have
    diagnostic para to r/o SBP. Delaying paracentesis \> 12 hours is
    associated with a 2.7-fold increase in mortality.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Obtain cell count with diff

-   Calculate the PMNs: total nucleated cells x % neutrophils.

-   PMN \> 250 cells is diagnostic of SBP. If there are greater than
    100k RBCs, you should correct for them: for every 250 RBCs, subtract
    1 PMN

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   A positive ascitic bacterial culture with PMN \<250 is called
    bacterascites and asymptomatic patients with bacterascites should
    NOT receive antibiotics as it is likely a contaminant (however,
    repeat paracentesis should be performed to exclude progression to
    SBP). You will also frequently see culture-negative SBP (neutrocytic
    ascites) which SHOULD be treated (see below).

Management

-   Immediately start empiric antibiotics

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Guidelines recommend cefotaxime IV 2gm q8 hours x 5 days, but we
    commonly use ceftriaxone IV 2g q24h for 5-7 days at VUMC and
    Nashville VA

    -   Most common culprits (E. coli, Klebsiella, streptococcal
        species, staphylococcal species)

    -   If SBP developed with recent hospital admission (90 days),
        recent exposure to BSA, diagnosed \>48 hours of admission, or
        with sepsis, should give zosyn +/- vanc if prior infection or
        positive swab for MRSA. Daptomycin should be added with hx of
        VRE infection instead of vanc.

    -   Finally, in patients with current or recent exposure to zosyn
        consider meropenem for MDR coverage.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IV albumin 1.5 g/kg on day 1 and 1g/kg on day 3

-   NSBB do not need to be discontinued in patients with SBP unless
    hypotensive (mean arterial pressure \<65mmHg). If stopped, the
    timing of re-initiation is based on recovery of blood pressure

-   PPI's ↑ risk for SBP in pts with cirrhosis, and should be reviewed
    for appropriateness

-   Repeat diagnostic paracentesis two days after antibiotics initiated

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If \<25% decrease in PMNs, antibiotics should be broadened. Consider
    secondary bacterial peritonitis.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Prophylaxis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   GI bleed: ceftriaxone 1g daily 🡪 ciprofloxacin 500mg BID (preferred)
    or Bactrim one DS tablet BID x 5-7 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Outpatient lifelong prophylaxis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Prior SBP

-   Ascitic protein \<1.5 [AND]{.underline} Child Pugh \>9 and bilirubin
    \>3 [OR]{.underline} Renal dysfunction (Cr \>1.2, Na \<130, or BUN
    \>25)

-   Preferred: Bactrim DS tab daily or ciprofloxacin 500mg daily

-   Alternatives: cefdinir 300mg daily, Augmentin 875/125 daily

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If suspicion is high for secondary bacterial peritonitis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Examine serum-ascites albumin gradient (SAAG). SBP develops in pts
    with portal hypertension, defined by SAAG \> 1.1 g/dL. SBP is
    unlikely if SAAG is \< 1.1 g/dL.

-   While not particularly sensitive, an ascitic leukocyte count of
    5-10k should prompt consideration of secondary peritonitis

-   Amylase from fluid can also be helpful to point towards pancreatic
    ascites, while bilirubin can indicate gallbladder perforation.

-   Peritoneal fluid CEA and alkaline phosphatase can additionally help
    identify hollow viscus injury.

-   Evaluate with cross-sectional imaging and surgical consultation as
    appropriate

-   Runyon's Criteria to distinguish, requires 2/3 criteria below
    (protein, glucose, LDH)

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                           Spontaneous              Secondary
  ------------------------ ------------------------ ---------------------
  Protein (g/dL)           \< 1                     \> 1

  Glucose (mg/dL)          ≥50                      \< 50

  LDH (U)                  Elevated, but \< 225     \> 225

  Organisms                0-1                      Polymicrobial
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Gastroesophageal Varices and Hemorrhage -- H. Anh Nguyen

Background

-   Varices form due to portosystemic collaterals in the setting of
    portal HTN

-   Gastroesophageal varices are present in approximately 50% of
    patients with cirrhosis and their presence correlates with severity
    of liver disease

-   The risk of mortality with esophageal variceal hemorrhage (EVH) can
    be up to 15-20%

-   Recurrence occurs in over 60% of patients within 1-2 years of the
    index event

-   The most important predictor of hemorrhage is the size of the
    varices. Other predictors include decompensated cirrhosis (Child
    B/C) and endoscopic presence of red wale marks or red spots

-   Variceal Screening:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Regular screening not required in all patients with cirrhosis though
    initial EGD at time of cirrhosis diagnosis is recommended. Screening
    can be omitted in patients without evidence of clinically
    significant portal hypertension (low liver stiffness on elastography
    \[LSM \<20 and platelets \>150\], repeated TE annually) and in
    patients at low risk of bleed on NSBB.

-   Compensated cirrhosis without varices: EGD q3yr

-   Compensated cirrhosis with small varices that have not bled: EGD
    q2yr (unless on NSBB, then no need for follow-up EGD)

-   Decompensated cirrhosis: EGD at time of decompensated and then q1yr

-   Medium/large varices that have not bled: NSBB if tolerated (follow
    up surveillance EGD unnecessary) or EVL, repeated until obliterated
    with first surveillance EGD 1-3 months after and q 6-12 months to
    check for recurrence

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In general, most patients with cirrhosis should be on propranolol or
    carvedilol (preferred due to intrinsic anti-alpha-1-adrenergic
    activity and facilitates the release of nitric oxide, induces
    intrahepatic vasodilation further reducing portal pressure), per new
    guidelines. Always check with the hep attendings if BB needs to be
    started.

Management (Non-Bleeding Varices)

-   Primary ppx with either NSBB (preferred if tolerated; see table
    below) or endoscopic variceal ligation (EVL). EVL indicated in
    patients with high risk of bleeding (medium/large varices, small
    varices with red wale sign, or decompensated patients with varices
    of any size).

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Carvedilol has greater reduction in portal pressures and is
    preferred if tolerated (goal 6.25mg BID)

-   Nadolol (given nightly as portal pressures are highest at night) or
    propranolol (BID)

-   For secondary ppx, initiate \~72hr after acute bleed has resolved
    and octreotide discontinued

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Discontinue if: hypotension (SBP \<90), AKI-HRS, SBP, or
    hyponatremia with refractory ascites

-   Secondary ppx with both NSBB and EVL

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NSBB are associated with reduced mortality, while EVL is not

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Of note, in patients with clinically significant portal HTN but are
    without varices, there is no evidence to support the use of NSBB to
    prevent varices formation, but high-level evidence does support use
    of NSBB (strongest evidence for Carvedilol) in prevention of any
    decompensation (ascites, variceal hemorrhage, HE) and has a
    mortality benefit (likely driven by significant reduction in ascites
    development)

    Management (Bleeding Varices)

-   Place two large-bore IVs (18G or larger), resuscitate with blood
    products and albumin. Activate massive transfusion protocol if
    needed.

-   Consider intubation if need for emergent EGD, change in mental
    status, ongoing hematemesis, or inability to protect airway

-   Start octreotide 50 mcg IV bolus followed by continuous infusion of
    50 mcg/h, to be continued for at 2-5 days should EVH be confirmed on
    endoscopy

-   Ceftriaxone 1g IV q24h for SBP prophylaxis (reduced mortality), then
    transition to PO ciprofloxacin for total 7-day course

-   Consult GI for upper endoscopy for possible EVL vs sclerotherapy.
    EGD should be performed within 12 hours of admission.

-   Consider balloon tamponade with Blakemore as temporizing measure
    before definitive management. Patient must be intubated before
    placement, and preferably GI should be made aware prior to
    placement.

-   No role for the correction of INR, even in the presence of bleeding
    as excessive blood products and FFP can increase portal pressures
    and cause worsening bleeding

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Vitamin K can be given w/ ↑ INR, though is unlikely to help in the
    acute setting

-   Check TEG and fibrinogen and transfuse based on results

-   AASLD does not recommend specific platelet targets during variceal
    hemorrhage

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Administer blood products in balanced ratio to avoid transfusion
    related coagulopathy

  ------------- ----------------------- ---------- ----------- -------------- --------------
  Therapy       MOA                     Starting   Titration   Max dose       Goal
                                        dose                                  

  Propranolol   Decreased cardiac       20--40 mg  Increase    Without        HR of 55--60
                output; caused by       twice      the dose    ascites: 320   bpm if
                decreased heart rate    daily      every 2--3  mg/day; with   tolerated; SBP
                and contractility from             d until     ascites: 160   should be
                beta-1 adrenergic                  treatment   mg/day         maintained ≥90
                blockade                           goal                       mm Hg

  Nadolol       Above plus Splanchnic   20--40 mg  Increase    Without        HR of 55--60
                arterial                at bedtime the dose    ascites: 160   bpm if
                vasoconstriction;                  every 2--3  mg/day; with   tolerated; SBP
                caused by beta-2                   d until     ascites: 80    should be
                blockade leading to                treatment   mg/day         maintained ≥90
                unopposed                          goal                       mm Hg
                alfa-adrenergic                                               
                vasoconstriction                                              

  Carvedilol    Above plus decreased    6.25 mg    Increase to 12.5 mg/day    No HR goal;
                intrahepatic vascular   once daily 6.25 mg     (higher doses  SBP should be
                resistance; caused by              twice daily could be       maintained ≥90
                anti-alpha-adrenergic              after 3 d   considered for mm Hg
                activity                                       non-hepatic    
                                                               indications)   
  ------------- ----------------------- ---------- ----------- -------------- --------------

Ascites and Hepatic Hydrothorax -- Thomas Strobel

Ascites

Background

-   Associated with a reduction in 5-year survival from 80% to 30%.

-   Most often due to portal HTN. Less common causes include peritoneal
    or metastatic cancer, CHF, TB, nephrotic syndrome, Budd-Chiari,
    sinusoidal obstructive syndrome (S.O.S), or complications from
    procedures and pancreatitis

+--------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
| -   Grade          | -   Definition         | -   Treatment          |
+--------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
| -   Grade 1        | -   Only seen on       | -   2g Na restriction  |
|     Ascites        |     imaging            |                        |
+--------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
| -   Grade 2        | -   Moderate,          | -   2g Na restriction, |
|     Ascites        |     symmetric          |     diuretics          |
|                    |     abdominal          |                        |
|                    |     distension         |                        |
+--------------------+------------------------+------------------------+
| -   Grade 3        | -   Marked, tense      | -   LVP + Na           |
|     Ascites        |     abdominal          |     restriction,       |
|                    |     distension         |     diuretics (unless  |
|                    |                        |     refractory)        |
+--------------------+------------------------+------------------------+

Hepatic Encephalopathy (HE)- Ahmad Yanis

Classifications of HE:

-   Type A: in patients with acute liver failure

-   Type B: in patients with portosystemic shunt without significant
    liver disease

-   Type C: in patients with cirrhosis

-   Covert HE: minor or no signs/symptoms but abnormalities on
    neuropsychological and/or neurophysiological tests

-   Overt HE: Clinically appreciable change In mental status (e.g.,
    AxOx2 or asterixis) recurrent (≥ 2 bouts) within 6 months

-   persistent if the patient does not return to their baseline
    performance between bouts.

Evaluation

-   Asterixis: inability to maintain stable posture; many ways to assess

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Check for clonus

-   Have pt "hold out hands like you are stopping traffic" (if following
    commands)

-   Shine light in pupil (look up video of hippus)

  ----------- -------------------------------------------------------------
  **Grade**   **Behavior Change**

  I           Mild confusion, changes in behavior, increased sleep, no
              asterixis, cannot be confirmed without neuropsych testing

  II          Moderate confusion, lethargic, AAOx2, +asterixis

  III         Marked confusion, arousable but falls asleep, incoherent
              speech, AAOx1, +asterixis

  IV          Coma
  ----------- -------------------------------------------------------------

-   Identify precipitants

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infection (rule out SBP in addition to CXR, BCx, UA/Cx),

-   Medication non-adherence (lactulose)

-   GI bleed (perform rectal exam and observe Hgb trend)

-   Over-diuresis resulting in dehydration, electrolyte abnormalities
    (especially hypoK)

-   Sedatives/benzo/opiate administration (UDS)

-   Brain imaging does not provide any diagnostic value for HE but may
    be utilized if diagnostic uncertainty exists

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Increased ammonia (NH3) levels do not add any diagnostic, staging,
    or prognostic value in patients with CLD. A normal ammonia level,
    however, calls for diagnostic re-evaluation

-   Arterial NH3 is used in acute liver failure for prognostication (not
    for management)

Management

-   Always determine precipitant and treat underlying condition

-   Lactulose 30mL TID initially titrated to 2-3 BMs/D as secondary
    prophylaxis after the management of first episode of overt HE.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Titrate dose to at least 4 BMs daily, avoid excessive stool output
    which may exacerbate HE d/t dehydration and electrolyte
    abnormalities

-   Consider lactulose enemas vs DHT placement if pt unable to tolerate
    PO

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   DHT are not contraindicated in patients with esophageal varices, but
    should be avoided in patients with recent hemorrhage or banding

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Add Rifaximin after the second episode of HE, or if failure to
    respond to lactulose

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Frequently requires prior authorization for outpatient approval and
    is expensive

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider the addition of golytely as it has been found in RCTs to
    expedite resolution of severe HE by 1 day

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lactulose is generally continued indefinitely after first episode of
    HE, though discontinuation can be considered on an individual basis
    if predisposing factors (recurrent infection, EVH, EtOH use) have
    resolved, improvement in liver function, and improvement in
    nutritional status

-   For patients with chronic diarrhea off lactulose, consider adding
    BCAA (0.25 gm/kg/d)

AKI & Hepatorenal Syndrome (HRS) -- Garren Montgomery

Background

-   Portal HTN causes shear stress on portal vessels à endothelium
    release of vasodilators à splanchnic vasodilation and reduced
    effective blood volume (decreased MAP) àRAAS activation à sodium and
    water retention and severe renal vasoconstriction

-   Bacterial translocation (as seen in SBP) increased circulating
    pro-inflammatory cytokines à splanchnic vasodilation

-   Definitions:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   HRS-AKI (formerly type I HRS): Rise in Cr ≥0.3 within 48h, rise in
    Cr ≥50% within 7 days, OR UOP \<0.5 mL/kg/hr for 6 hours

-   HRS-NAKI ("non-AKI") (formerly type II HRS):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   HRS-AKD: eGFR\<60 for \<3 months in absence of other structural
    causes OR % rise in Cr ≤50% using last available Cr over last 3
    months as baseline

-   HRS-CKD: eGFR\<60 for ≥3 months in absence of other structural
    causes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diagnostic Criteria

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diagnosis of AKI (see above) without other cause (see below)

-   No response or inadequate response at 48 hrs after volume expansion
    with albumin (1g/kg/day) and withdrawal of diuretics

-   Absence of proteinuria (\<500 mg/d), absence of hematuria (\<50 RBCs
    per HPF), normal renal ultrasound (exclude if patient has known CKD)

-   Suggestion of renal vasoconstriction with FeNa \<0.2, FeUrea \<20
    (most sensitive diagnostic measure). UNa \<20 is suggestive but not
    diagnostic given baseline sodium avidity in cirrhosis and inability
    to calculate FeNa. If UNa Is \<20, FeNa cannot be calculated.

-   Cut off for ATN in cirrhosis is a FeNa \>0.5, rather than 1 in the
    general population

Evaluation

-   Step 1: Exclude other obvious causes of renal injury such as
    hypovolemia or ATN

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Common precipitants of AKI: infection, over diuresis, GI bleeding,
    recent LVP without subsequent volume expansion, nephrotoxic
    drugs/NSAIDs

-   Workup: BMP, UA with microscopy, urine electrolytes (FeNa, FeUrea),
    urine protein/Cr ratio, renal ultrasound (to assess for chronicity),
    diagnostic para to rule out SBP

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Step 2: Diuretic cessation/albumin challenge

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   STOP all diuretics, beta blockers, NSAIDs, ACE/ARBs,
    anti-hypertensives, vasodilators, nephrotoxins

-   START volume expansion with albumin 1g/kg/day (up to a max of 100
    g/day) x2 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Step 3: Diagnosis of HRS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If no other clear cause of AKI is identified and SCr has not
    improved after 48 hours of diuretic cessation and volume expansion,
    proceed promptly to vasopressor treatment

Management

-   Pharmacologic therapies (in order of preference):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Terlipressin (+/- albumin 50g/day, unless there is evidence of
    volume overload). Most effective medication based on randomized
    clinical trials, NOW FDA APPROVED and approved for use at VUMC in
    Transplant Candidates only. Titration is done based on creatinine
    response.

-   Alternatively, consider Norepinephrine (+/- albumin 50 g/day)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Requires central access (PICC vs triple lumen) but can be
    administered on stepdown unit

-   Guidelines recommend NE to be dosed at 0.5-3 mg/hr. Would ask
    fellow, attending or pharmacist for baseline. VUMC protocol for ICU
    and stepdown:

-   Start NE gtt at 3mcg/min. If UOP is \<200 or MAP \<10mm Hg from
    baseline, increase by 3 mcg/min every 4 hours

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Continue to hold diuretics. LVP is still generally considered safe
    even in HRS if indicated by tense ascites (account for albumin
    repletion from LVP and HRS protocol). This can be attending specific
    and would confirm prior to performing

-   Therapy is generally continued until HRS is reversed or the
    hepatology attending deems it refractory to medical treatment. (Per
    guidelines, protocol normally discontinued if Cr remains at
    pretreatment level or above \>4 days)

-   Patients with HRS-NAKI (formerly type II HRS) may respond to the
    above therapies, but recurrence of renal dysfunction after
    withdrawal of vasoconstrictors is the norm and thus current
    guidelines do not recommend them for this scenario

-   RRT: Dialysis can be considered for those who fail to respond to
    pharmacologic therapy, particularly as a bridge to liver transplant.
    Decision to initiate should be individualized

-   Liver transplant: The best and most definitive treatment regardless
    of response to pharmacologic therapy

-   Simultaneous liver-kidney transplant:

-   HRS often resolves with LT alone. Indications for kidney transplant
    are usually for patients with severe chronic renal dysfunction or on
    RRT. Must consult transplant nephrology.

-   Criteria for SLKT:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   eGFR \<60 for \>30 days AND latest eGFR \<30

-   eGFR \<25 for \>6 consecutive weeks with a documented eGFR q7 days

-   Metabolic kidney disease and polycystic disease

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can qualify for safety net kidney transplant after liver transplant
    if eGFR \<20 2-12 months post-operatively (would be at higher
    priority than the rest of the kidney transplant list)

Hyponatremia in Cirrhosis -- Kinsley Ojukwu

Background 

-   Hyponatremia in cirrhosis is often defined as serum Na \< 135
    mmol/L 

-   Very common problem; prevalence: \~50% of individuals have serum \<
    135 mmol/L, \~22% \< 130 mmol/L 

-   Degree of hyponatremia is associated with progression of cirrhosis;
    patients with hypona have greater incidence of HE, SBP, and HRS,
    increased complications & mortality pre/post-tx.  

-   Patients most commonly have hypervolemic (dilutional) hypona.

-   Pathophysiology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hypovolemic hyponatremia: 2/2 excessive diuretic use 

-   Hypervolemic hyponatremia:  Advanced cirrhosis -\> chronic
    inflammation and fibrosis in liver -\> increased resistance to
    portal flow -\> portal hypertension -\> release of vasoactive
    compounds (primarily nitric oxide) -\> splanchnic arterial
    vasodilation -\> reduced effective arterial blood volume (splanchnic
    veins contain 20% to 50% of the total blood volume) -\> reduced
    effective intravascular volume leads to activation of RAAS + ADH +
    sympathetic nervous system -\>RAAS encourages Na retention and ADH
    causes insertion of aquaporins in distal tubule and collecting duct
    to increase water reabsorption -\> dilutional (hypervolemic)
    hyponatremia 

Evaluation 

-   Uosm, Sosm, UNa to rule out competing processes (e.g. beer
    potomania) 

Management 

-   Do not correct Na faster than 6-8mEq/L in 24 hours

-   Discontinue anti-hypertensives (including beta blockers) in patients
    with ascites and hypona. Hold diuretics when Na \<125 

-   Fluid restriction is recommended only in patients with Na \<125.
    Restriction is generally effective at 1-1.5L and must be less than
    daily UOP to increase free water excretion 

-   Replete K to 4.0

-   25% albumin infusion (1g/kg split into BID dosing), has been shown
    to increase serum Na and have higher rates of hypona resolution at
    30 days 

-   Treatment considerations include vasopressors, urea tabs

-   Vaptans are generally not used in clinical practice given recent
    RCTs showing harm with use

-   Salt tabs should not be used to raise serum Na due to worsening
    hypervolemia

-   Nephrology should be consulted if not improved after 48 hours

Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunt (TIPS) -- Ahmad Yanis

Background

-   A TIPS procedure is done by IR to manage sequalae of portal HTN
    (specifically variceal bleeding and ascites)

-   A low-resistance shunt is created between an intrahepatic branch of
    the portal vein and the hepatic vein, allowing blood to bypass the
    high-resistance vessels within the fibrotic liver[.]{.underline}

-   Ideally, creating the smallest-necessary caliber shunt is desirable.
    Recent studies suggest that an 8-mm-diameter PTFE-lined TIPS may be
    sufficient to prevent variceal rebleeding and potentially decrease
    the incidence of hepatic encephalopathy

Evaluation

-   Indications for TIPS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Variceal hemorrhage (esophageal, gastric, etc.)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Early "preemptive" TIPS is an urgent TIPS placement within 72 hrs
    (preferably within 24 hours) of initial endoscopic hemostasis in pts
    at high risk for rebleeding (Child-Pugh Class B with active bleeding
    upon insertion of endoscope or Child-Pugh Class C with recent
    bleeding

-   "Rescue" TIPS is placed in pts with active, uncontrolled variceal
    bleeding or if bleeding recurs despite maximal endoscopic and
    pharmacologic therapy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Refractory ascites (prolongs survival)

-   Other: bleeding portal hypertensive gastropathy, bleeding gastric
    varices, PVT recanalization, Budd-Chiari syndrome, hepatic
    hydrothorax

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Contraindications to TIPS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Absolute contraindications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Primary prevention of variceal bleeding, congestive heart failure,
    severe tricuspid regurgitation, severe pulmonary hypertension,
    multiple hepatic cysts or masses, Sepsis, unrelieved biliary
    obstruction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Relative contraindications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hepatic encephalopathy, hepatic tumors (especially if centrally
    located), thrombocytopenia (\<20k), moderate pulmonary hypertension

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pre-procedure preparation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Labs: CBC, CMP, INR

-   Liver imaging to assess portal system patency and exclude liver
    masses

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ideally triple phase CT with contrast

-   In pts with renal impairment or active variceal bleeding, RUQ U/S
    with doppler is acceptable

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TTE to evaluate for evidence of congestive heart failure, pulmonary
    hypertension, or valvular disease.

-   Antibiotic ppx with ceftriaxone 1g IV once at the time of TIPS
    insertion as enteric bacteria within the static portal system can
    enter systemic circulation

-   Patients with HE should receive rifaximin prophylaxis starting 2
    weeks before procedure and maintained for at least 6 months after
    the procedure

Management Post-TIPS

-   Immediately following TIPS, pts are observed in the hospital
    overnight for complications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Monitor CBC and vitals closely. If hemodynamically unstable, STAT
    CBC and low threshold to obtain CTA A/P to evaluate for a bleeding
    source

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TIPS causes a substantial increase in venous return to the heart,
    which can unmask cardiac dysfunction that was previously compensated
    for

-   Obtain RUQ U/S with Doppler to assess shunt patency 1 month of TIPS
    placement, or if ascites and/or variceal hemorrhage reoccur

-   If patient with a TIPS develops refractory HE, can consider TIPS
    revision to lessen HE symptoms

-   Clearance of ascites is not immediate post‐TIPS (may take 6-12
    weeks), and patients should be maintained on a sodium‐restricted
    diet and diuretics until ascites is adequately controlled.

-   Hemodynamic Pressure Measurements and Goals

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The HVPG refers to the difference in intravascular pressure between
    the portal vein and the hepatic vein. During TIPS placement, direct
    portal pressures are measured and used to calculate the
    portosystemic pressure gradient (PSPG)

-   In patients with acute, uncontrolled esophageal variceal bleeding,
    the desired post-TIPS PSPG is \<12 mm Hg or, If the former is not
    feasible, a reduction ≥50% from baseline PSPG

-   The desired PSPG for secondary prevention of gastroesophageal
    variceal bleeding is \<12 mm Hg

-   In patients not achieving a PSPG \<12 mm Hg despite dilation of the
    stent to a maximum 10 mm of diameter, the addition of nonselective
    beta-blockers (NSBBs) should be considered

Hepatocellular Carcinoma (HCC) -- Julie Cui

Background

-   Fifth most common tumor and the second most common cause of cancer
    related death worldwide

-   The incidence in patients with cirrhosis is 2-4% per year

-   In chronic HBV and NASH, pts can develop HCC without having
    cirrhosis

Evaluation

-   Regular screening in pts with cirrhosis (or chronic HBV without
    cirrhosis) for HCC

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   RUQ U/S q6mo (with or without AFP)

-   Routine screening with CT or MRI is not recommended

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Options If U/S not satisfactory:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CT A/P w/contrast, in comments specify triple phase for HCC
    screening

-   MRI, specify Gadovist (preferred contrast agent)

-   Contrast-enhanced ultrasound

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   AFP trend is more useful than one value in time, though AFP \>20
    should prompt multiphase CT or MRI for further evaluation

-   Diagnosis can be made either by imaging (most common) or biopsy
    (rare)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Triple phase CT demonstrates strong early uptake in arterial phase,
    with subsequent wash-out in portal-venous phase

-   If diagnosis remains unclear: can surveillance imaging or biopsy

-   LI-RADS system notes risk of malignancy based on imaging
    characteristics

  ------------- ------------------------ ---------------------------------
  **LI-RADS**   **What does it mean?**   **What do we do?**

  LR-1 to LR-2  Definitely/probably      Routine surveillance, consider
                benign                   diagnostic imaging within 6 mos

  LR-3 to LR-4  Indeterminate/probably   Repeat or alternative diagnostic
                HCC                      imaging in 3-6 mos. Consider Bx
                                         for LI-RADS 4

  LR-5          Definitely HCC           Plan treatment as noted below

  LR-M          Cancer, but may not be   
                HCC                      
  ------------- ------------------------ ---------------------------------

Management

-   Lesions that meet Milan criteria can qualify for MELD exception
    points and are considered transplant candidates

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   This accounts for pts with minimal synthetic dysfunction (and
    therefore low MELD)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Milan criteria:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Single tumor with diameter \>2cm but \<5 cm, no more than 3 tumors,
    each \<3 cm

-   No signs of extra-hepatic involvement or vascular invasion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Liver transplant is definitive treatment, although resection can
    also be curative (favored in pts with early cirrhosis i.e. Child
    Pugh A)

-   Locoregional therapies: Pts with unresectable disease, or who are
    not surgical candidates

  ----------------------- -----------------------------------------------
  **Therapy**             **Details**

  Radiofrequency ablation If in a favorable location and size, IR can
                          percutaneously ablate with a large needle that
                          emits microwave frequencies

  Trans-arterial          Chemotherapeutic agents injected into the tumor
  chemoembolization       to occlude the feeding artery to the area.
  (TACE)                  

  Trans-arterial          Like TACE, though radioactive compound (i.e.
  radioembolization       Y-90) is Injected In the the feeding artery
  (TARE)                  

  Stereotactic body       Radiation therapy: can be used as an
  Radiation Therapy       alternative to ablation or trans-arterial
  (SBRT)                  therapy

  Systemic Chemotherapy   For metastatic disease
  ----------------------- -----------------------------------------------

Coagulopathy in Cirrhosis --John Laurenzano

Background

-   The liver is responsible for production of both pro- (factor II, V,
    VII, IV, X, and XI) and anti-coagulants (protein C, S) in
    hemostasis. Factor VIII is the only one not made by the liver.

-   Thrombocytopenia is caused by splenic sequestration from portal HTN,
    failure to produce thrombopoietin (TPO), and bone marrow failure

-   Hemostatic changes in cirrhotics are incredibly complex, as they
    involve both procoagulant and anticoagulants. The current thought is
    that cirrhosis is NO LONGER considered a condition associated with
    an overall increased bleeding tendency, as the pro-hemostatic and
    anti-hemostatic pathways are deranged in a way that counterbalance
    each other.

Evaluation

-   INR/PT, and PTT are poorly reflective of bleeding risk

Management

-   Pre-procedural FFP is not recommended, as it has potential harm w/o
    proven benefit

-   Low risk procedures (i.e., paracentesis) do not require
    pre-procedural blood products and per guidelines there is no
    established INR or platelet cut off

-   In bleeding pts, the following are recommended per AASLD and AGA
    guidelines

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IV Vitamin K 10mg x 3 days

-   FFP: Not recommended, unless as part of a balanced transfusion
    effort to avoid transfusion related coagulopathy, or if a TEG screen
    suggests potential benefit

-   Cryoprecipitate: if fibrinogen \< 120

-   Platelets: No specific targets regardless of bleeding.
    Pre-procedurally, recommend \>50

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Appropriate DVT ppx should be given with few exceptions (plts \<50k,
    active hemorrhage)

-   For TEG transfusion recommendations are as follows:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   10 mg/kg FFP if R-time \>10 minutes

-   1u Plts if maximum amplitude \<55 mm

-   5u cryo if alpha angle \<45

Portal Vein Thrombosis (PVT) -- Pakinam Mekki

Background

-   Portal Vein Thrombosis (PVT) can worsen decompensation (i.e.
    variceal hemorrhage), however, worsening portal HTN à more sluggish
    flow à increased risk PVT

Presentation

-   Often identified asymptomatically on U/S, but can be identified by
    new or worsening decompensation of portal HTN

-   Variceal hemorrhage is the most common decompensating event
    associated with PVT

-   Intestinal ischemia (abdominal pain, hematochezia) from PVT is
    exceedingly rare but associated with significant morbidity/mortality

Evaluation

-   RUQ U/S with doppler

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Once identified, should be further assessed with triple phase CT or
    MRI with Gadovist contrast to exclude HCC with tumor thrombus

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pts with newly identified PVT should undergo EGD to evaluate for
    high-risk varices, both for diagnostic and therapeutic
    considerations

-   PVT in pts without cirrhosis should prompt evaluation for
    hypercoagulable disorders

Management

-   Start AC if acute thrombus occludes \>50% of main portal vein, \<50%
    but extends into SMV, thrombus is symptomatic, or patient is a
    transplant candidate (irrespective of size). Requires discussion
    with attending/transplant team.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   AC options: warfarin, LMWH, or DOAC

-   DOAC's are safe in Childs Class A, can be used with caution in
    Childs B, and are contraindicated in Childs C

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pts with chronic occlusive PVT (\>6 mos) or with cavernous
    transformation with collaterals do not generally benefit from AC

-   Pts with high-risk varices should undergo endoscopic management or
    be on NSBB for prophylaxis for variceal hemorrhage, as noted above

-   TIPS with portal vein recanalization has recently emerged as a
    therapeutic modality for PVT in LT candidates to allow for
    anastomosis, in patient's with chronic PVT and recurrent
    bleeding/refractory ascites, or in patients whom intestinal ischemia
    persists despite AC.

-   Pts should undergo follow up intermittently with US to assess for
    recanalization. AC may be stopped if there is failure to recanalize.

-   If pts are not candidates for AC, they'll simply be treated for
    complications of portal HTN

Alcohol-associated Hepatitis -- Ahmad Yanis

Background

-   Acute onset of rapidly progressive jaundice (within prior 8 weeks)
    in pt with heavy EtOH intake (\>40g in females or \>60g in males
    EtOH/day for \>6 mos, or within \<60 days of abstinence)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   May present after they have quit drinking due to immunosuppressive
    effects of alcohol

-   Risk Factors: Female, Hispanic ethnicity, binge drinking, poor
    nutrition, and obesity

Evaluation

-   AST \>60, AST/ALT \>1.5, both values \<400 IU/L; TBili \>3.0 mg/dL,
    documentation of heavy EtOH use until 8 weeks prior to presentation
    (some guidelines state 12 weeks)

-   Prognostication with Maddrey's Discriminant Function: 4.6 \* (PTpt
    -- PTctrl) + Tbili

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Maddrey \> 32 or MELD \> 20 = poor 30d prognosis & may benefit from
    steroids (see below)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   RUQ U/S to rule out obstructive cause of jaundice

-   Biopsy is not typically required but will show neutrophilic lobular
    inflammation, hepatocyte ballooning, steatosis, and pericellular
    fibrosis.

-   Phosphatidylethanol (PEth) level is a biomarker of ethanol
    consumption over \~ 4wks; \>20 ng/mL can indicate chronic
    moderate/heavy alcohol intake

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   A single episode consumption can result in detectable Peth for up to
    12 days. Can be elevated for months with regular heavy alcohol
    intake

-   EtOH levels may be negative unless acutely intoxicated

Management

-   Supportive Care is essential! Consult nutrition, start high protein,
    high calorie diet, high dose Thiamine x 3d, Folate, MVI

-   Full infection workup (CXR, UA, BCx, paracentesis) regardless of
    symptoms

-   Steroids:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Discuss with hepatology team, \>20 clinical trials conducted with
    inconsistent results

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Largest trial was the STOP-AH Trial (NEJM 2015) which showed
    improved mortality at 28 days in post hoc analysis, but not at 90
    days in patients with Maddrey \> 32.

-   VA trial (patients with MDF \>54) showed increased mortality,
    indicating a possible ceiling at which point steroids may be
    harmful.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Individuals with a neutrophil: lymphocyte ratio of 5-8 are most
    likely to benefit from steroid use.

-   Treatment dose is prednisolone 40mg daily (preferred over prednisone
    as it requires hepatic metabolism)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Contraindications to steroids include: presence of infection (must
    rule out first including TB, active Hep B, sepsis, uncontrolled GI
    bleeding, AKI w/ Cr \>2.5 mg/dL)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The Lille score can be used to assess response to steroids after 7 d
    of therapy and prognosticate mortality at 6 months

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lille\> 0.45 indicates no response to steroids and predicts 75%
    mortality at 6 months

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NAC should be considered as adjunctive therapy to steroids

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Monitor on CIWA

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Psychiatry consultation as appropriate, consideration of medical
    therapy (see "Substance Use Disorders" section in psychiatry)

MASH and MASLD-- Shabnam Eghbali

Background

-   Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD)
    presence of hepatic steatosis (\>5% of hepatocytes with
    macro-vesicular steatosis) in the absence of secondary causes (e.g,
    EtOH or HCV GT3) and at least one of five of the below criteria:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   BMI ≥ 25 OR waist circumference \> 94 cm (M) / 80 cm (F)

-   Fasting serum glucose ≥ 100 OR 2-hr post-load glucose levels ≥ 140
    OR HgbA1c ≥ 5.7% OR T2DM

-   Blood pressure ≥ 130/85 OR on anti-hypertensive medication

-   Plasma triglycerides ≥ 150 OR on lipid lowering treatment

-   Plasma HDL ≤ 40 (M) / 50 (F) OR on lipid lowering treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) evidence of
    active inflammation and cellular injury +/- fibrosis

-   Strong association with metabolic syndrome, T2DM, HTN, obesity

-   Prevalence of MASLD is 25-30% in general population and is now the
    leading cause of transplantation in American women

Presentation:

-   MASLD is asymptomatic and frequently found incidentally via imaging

-   MASH manifests with elevated liver enzymes, typically 2-5x the ULN,
    in a roughly 1:1 ratio (as opposed to alcoholic steatohepatitis),
    though ALT may be higher than AST. MASLD or MASH does NOT cause RUQ
    pain. Patients can still have normal liver enzymes with MASLD or
    MASH.

Evaluation

-   Exclusion of alternative causes and comorbid liver conditions: HCV,
    HBV, EtOH, etc.

-   Screen for comorbid metabolic disorders: Lipid panel, hemoglobin a1c

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Primary risk assessment with FIB-4 (see NITs section)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diagnosis commonly made via imaging

-   US is used most frequently, although conventional B mode US lacks
    sensitivity for lower degrees of steatosis. As a result, controlled
    attenuation parameter (CAP) on VCTE (Ie FibroScan) is commonly used.

-   MRI is also acceptable. MRI-proton density fat fraction is a precise
    method for liver fat quantification (available for clinical care at
    VUMC)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Liver biopsy should be considered when non-invasive testing suggests
    significant fibrosis (≥F2)

Management

-   Aggressive risk factor modification and management of comorbidities
    (HLD, HTN, T2DM)

-   Weight loss: Mediterranean diet\>low fat diet (dose dependent
    improvement), increased coffee consumption is associated with less
    progression of liver disease

-   MASLD (fat only) Weight Loss Goal: \> 5% of body weight

-   MASH (fat and inflammation) Weight Loss Goal: \>10% of body weight

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider referral to weight loss clinic (BMI \>40, or \>35 with
    metabolic comorbidities)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Once the patient is diagnosed with MASLD, evaluation for fibrosis is
    indicated

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fibrosis-4 (FIB 4) score: First line assessment. Assesses
    probability of fibrosis.

-   Elastography: More accurate can be vibration based (fibroscan), US
    based (sheer-wave), or MR-based. Available at VUMC and can be
    ordered by anyone. Insurance will not cover MRE if BMI \<35

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fibroscan: \<10kPa r/o advanced chronic liver disease (fibrosis);
    10-15kPa are suggestive of advanced chronic liver disease; \>15kPa
    are highly suggestive.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Encourage etoh cessation; contributes to fatty liver disease
    progression

-   FDA recently approved Rezdiffra (resmetirom) for the treatment of
    adults with noncirrhotic MASLD with moderate to advanced liver
    scarring (fibrosis), to be used along with diet and exercise

-   SGLT2 Inhibitors: May reduce steatosis in patients with MASLD+ DM

-   Vitamin E: Can improve steatosis and inflammation in the setting of
    biopsy-proven MASH with evidence of hepatic fibrosis (fibrosis score
    2+) in patients w/o DM

-   GLP-1 agonists: Consider for patients with MASH+DM/obesity as it
    confers cardiovascular benefit and improves steatosis but probably
    not fibrosis

-   GLP-1/GIP agonist (e.g, semaglutide) Tirzepatide): Can reduce
    steatosis. Can be use in patients with DM or obesity + NAFLD

-   Metformin, DPP4, statins, and silymarin are well studied in MASH and
    do not offer meaningful histologic benefit

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In the pipeline: FGF21 agonists, THR beta agonists, PPAR agonists

Additional Information

-   Statins: should be used for HLD in pts with MASH, MASLD, and MASH
    cirrhosis

-   Statin use in decompensated M~~N~~ASH cirrhosis is controversial,
    and they are less likely to derive benefit given overall poor
    prognosis, discontinue w/acute on chronic liver failure.

Acute Liver Injury and Failure -- Wrinn Alexander

Background

-   Acute liver injury (ALI): elevated liver enzymes + INR ≥1.5 without
    encephalopathy

-   Acute liver failure (ALF): elevated liver enzymes + encephalopathy
    (any degree of AMS or asterixis) in the absence of pre-existing
    liver disease\*

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \*Autoimmune hepatitis, HBV, Wilson disease, and Budd-Chiari
    syndrome can have ALF if they develop new AMS, despite the presence
    of a pre-existing liver disease

-   Hyperacute (\< 7 d): most often seen with acetaminophen toxicity,
    Hepatitis A & E, Ischemic; high risk for cerebral edema

-   Acute (7-21 d): Hepatitis B

-   Subacute (\> 21 d and \< 26 wk): most often non-acetaminophen DILI

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Alcohol-associated hepatitis (AH) is not ALF (see above~~)~~

-   Duration of \<26 weeks is a commonly used cut-off

Etiology

-   R-factor (if history, exam, and diagnostic data are inconclusive
    i.e. R-factor is not a replacement to clinical judgement) = (ALT/uln
    ALT) / (ALP/uln ALP); See chart below

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   R \> 5 = hepatocellular injury; R\<2 = cholestatic injury; R 2-5 =
    mixed injury

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Isolated hyperbilirubinemia: Differentiate direct versus indirect

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Direct: Refer to cholestatic pattern

-   Indirect: Gilbert vs hemolysis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Drugs Associated with liver injury

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hepatocellular pattern: acarbose, Acetaminophen, Allopurinol,
    Amiodarone, Baclofen, Bupropion, Fluoxetine, HAART (Nevirapine),
    Kava kava, Isoniazid, Ketoconazole, Lisinopril, Losartan,
    Methotrexate, NSAIDs, Omeprazole, Oxacillin/Nafcillin, Paroxetine,
    Pyrazinamide, Propylthiouracil, Rifampin, Risperidone, Sertraline,
    Statins, Tetracycline, Trazodone, Valproic Acid

-   Mixed pattern: Amitriptyline, Azathioprine, Captopril,
    Carbamazepine, Clindamycin, Cyproheptadine, Enalapril, Flutemide,
    Nitrofurantoin, Phenobarbital, Phenytoin, Sulfonamides, Trazodone,
    Verapamil

-   Cholestatic pattern: Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, Anabolic steroids,
    Chlorpromazine, Clopidogrel, Oral contraceptives, Erythromycins,
    Estrogens, Irbesartan, Mirtazapine, Phenothiazines, Terbinafine,
    Tricyclics

+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| **Hepatocellular     |                      |                       |
| Injury: R factor \>  |                      |                       |
| 5 (Primary elevation |                      |                       |
| of AST/ALT)**        |                      |                       |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Etiology             | Description          | Work Up               |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Overdose/Toxins^\$^  | Acetaminophen, ASA,  | Acetaminophen,        |
|                      | alcohol, cocaine,    | ethanol level, Peth,  |
|                      | mushrooms (Amanita   | UDS                   |
|                      | phalloides)          |                       |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Acute Viral          | Hep A^\$^, B\*^\$^,  | Viral serologies and  |
| Hepatitis            | C\*, D, E            | PCR                   |
|                      |                      |                       |
|                      | EBV, CMV, HSV, VZV   |                       |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Autoimmune           | Presence of          | Anti-smooth muscle    |
| hepatitis\*          | circulating          | (f-actin), ANA, ANCA, |
|                      | autoantibodies and a | anti-liver kidney     |
|                      | high serum globulin  | microsome             |
|                      | concentration        | (anti-LKM-1),         |
|                      |                      | anti-soluble liver    |
|                      |                      | a                     |
|                      |                      | ntigen/liver-pancreas |
|                      |                      | IgG                   |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Budd-Chiari          | Hepatic vein         | Ultrasound of abdomen |
| Syndrome\*           | obstruction          | w/ doppler, CT w/     |
|                      |                      | contrast              |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| DILI -- Drug Induced | Dose independent     | Review patient's med  |
| Liver Injury\*^\$^   | (NOT an overdose)    | list with NIH Liver   |
|                      |                      | Tox Database:\        |
|                      |                      | [https://www.livert   |
|                      |                      | ox.nih.gov](https://w |
|                      |                      | ww.livertox.nih.gov/) |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| HELLP Syndrome,      | HELLP: A severe form | Check bHCG in females |
| Acute Fatty Liver of | of preeclampsia      | of reproductive age   |
| Pregnancy            |                      |                       |
|                      | AFLP: defects in     |                       |
|                      | fatty acid           |                       |
|                      | metabolism during    |                       |
|                      | pregnancy            |                       |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Ischemic Liver       | Shock (can be of any | AST \> ALT can be in  |
| Injury (Shock        | variety)             | the thousands, high   |
| Liver)^\$^           |                      | LDH, history of       |
|                      |                      | hypotension, UDS to   |
|                      |                      | eval for              |
|                      |                      | vasoconstrictive      |
|                      |                      | drugs                 |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Wilson's Disease\*   | Mutation in ATP7B,   | Ceruloplasmin level   |
|                      | gene for copper      | (screening), 24h      |
|                      | transport protein,   | urine copper          |
|                      | leads to             | (confirmation),       |
|                      | accumulation of      | quantitative copper   |
|                      | copper in liver and  | on liver biopsy.      |
|                      | other organs         | Genetic testing       |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| *\*May present with  |                      |                       |
| chronic liver injury |                      |                       |
| as well; \$May       |                      |                       |
| present with AST/ALT |                      |                       |
| \>100*               |                      |                       |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+

+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| **Cholestatic        |                      |                       |
| Injury: R Factor \<  |                      |                       |
| 2 (Primarily         |                      |                       |
| elevated Alkaline    |                      |                       |
| phosphatase)**       |                      |                       |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Etiology             | Description          | Work Up               |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Acute biliary        | Choledocholithiasis  | Abdominal ultrasound, |
| obstruction          |                      | MRCP, ERCP            |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| DILI -- Drug-induced | Dose independent     | Review patient's med  |
| liver injury\*^\$^   | (NOT an overdose)    | list. Refer to Liver  |
|                      |                      | Tox Database:         |
|                      |                      | [https://www.livert   |
|                      |                      | ox.nih.gov](https://w |
|                      |                      | ww.livertox.nih.gov/) |
|                      |                      |                       |
|                      |                      | Common: Augmentin,    |
|                      |                      | Bactrim, amiodarone,  |
|                      |                      | Imuran                |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Malignancy\*         | Pancreatic           | CT abdomen, ERCP      |
|                      | mlaignancy,          |                       |
|                      | cholangiocarcinoma   |                       |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Primary Biliary      | Autoimmune           | AMA, ALP. If AMA +    |
| Cirrhosis\*          |                      | and ALP \>225 meets   |
|                      |                      | diagnostic criteria.  |
|                      |                      | If only one positive, |
|                      |                      | will need liver       |
|                      |                      | biopsy.               |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Primary Sclerosing   | Autoimmune,          | MRCP, ERCP            |
| Cholangitis\*        | associated with IBD  |                       |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Critical illness or  | Hypotension, COVID   | MRCP with biliary     |
| COVID cholangiopathy |                      | stenosis, appropriate |
|                      |                      | history               |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| *\*May present with  |                      |                       |
| chronic liver injury |                      |                       |
| as well; \$May       |                      |                       |
| present with AST/ALT |                      |                       |
| \>100*               |                      |                       |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+

Evaluation

-   Neurologic Exam:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   See Hepatic Encephalopathy section for grading of HE based on PE/Hx

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Grade I and II HE: cerebral edema uncommon

-   Grade III HE: Cerebral Edema in 25-35% of patients

-   Grade IV HE: Cerebral Edema in 75% of patients

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Signs of increased intracranial pressure:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pupillary changes, Cushing's triad (HTN, bradycardia, respiratory
    depression, seizures, increased muscle tone and hyperreflexia,
    abnormal brainstem reflexes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consult hepatology once you suspect ALF! (to assist with workup AND
    for transplant evaluation)

-   Labs:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CBC w/diff, CMP, Dbili, Mg, Phos, T&S, BCx, UCx, PT/INR, aPTT,
    fibrinogen

-   Ferritin, Iron, transferrin (HFE gene mutation testing if Tsat ≥45%
    and/or elevated ferritin)

-   Amylase, lipase

-   Beta-hCG for females of childbearing age; UA to assess for
    proteinuria if pregnant

-   ABG with arterial lactate, ammonia (arterial \>124 predicts
    mortality and CNS complications e.g., need for intubation, seizures,
    cerebral edema, \<75 very unlikely to develop ICH)

-   Viral etiologies: Viral hepatitis serologies (HAV panel, HBV panel,
    HCV IgG +/- PCR quant, HDV if known HBV (with low or undetectable
    HBV load) as Misc Reference Test, Hepatitis E PCR sent as
    miscellaneous if pregnant or travel to southeast Asia), HIV p24 Ag
    and HIV Ab, EBV Qt, CMV Qt, HSV 1/2, Qt, VZV IgM/IgG

-   Toxins: UDS, ethanol level +/- Peth, acetaminophen level (drawn ≥4
    hours after last known ingestion), salicylate level

-   Autoimmune/genetic: ANA, ASMA, IgG, AMA (if predominantly elevated
    ALP), ceruloplasmin, anti-liver/kidney microsomal antibody type 1,
    anti-liver soluble antigen, alpha-1 antitrypsin

-   \*You may not order all the workup included above; hepatology will
    guide you on what exactly will need to be ordered.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Imaging:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   RUQ U/S with doppler (important to assess vasculature!)

-   Consider CT with contrast in patients with normal renal function and
    high suspicion of Budd-Chiari syndrome or malignancy with negative
    ultrasound (better for assessing the hepatic veins) and helps with
    transplant evaluation

-   Consider TTE to assess for cardiac dysfunction and aid in
    transplantation consideration

-   Consider CTH or MRI to assess for cerebral edema (findings include
    decrease in ventricular size, flattening of cerebral convolutions,
    reduction in signal intensity of brain parenchyma)

-   Consider ERCP/MRCP for cholestatic etiologies

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Discuss possible liver biopsy if etiology unclear

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Transjugular approach preferred with clinically demonstrable
    ascites; a known or suspected hemostatic defect; a small, hard,
    cirrhotic liver; morbid obesity with a difficult‐to‐identify flank
    site; or those in whom free and wedged hepatic vein pressure
    measurements are additionally being sought.

Management

-   Any pt with concern for ALF should be cared for in MICU (even if
    mild change in mental status)

-   Pts with ALF may die acutely from hypoglycemia, cerebral edema, and
    infection

-   ABC's:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Intubate for GCS \<8, Grade 3 or 4 HE

-   IVF resuscitation with isotonic crystalloid (most pts are volume
    deplete; avoid hypotonic fluids due to risk of cerebral edema)

-   Vasopressive agents for persistent hypotension (norepinephrine is
    the preferred agent, addition of vasopressin and stress dose
    steroids may be warranted)

    Monitoring:

-   Q1-2h neuro checks, Q1-2h glucose checks

-   Closely monitor CMP, Magnesium, phosphorus, INR q6-8 hrs

    Treatment of Primary Injury

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Early hepatology consult for liver transplant evaluation and
    assistance in management

-   IV N-acetylcysteine: May improve transplant-free survival even in
    patients WITHOUT non-acetaminophen drug induced acute liver failure

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Initial loading dose = 150mg/kg over 1 hour, then 50mg/kg/hr for 4
    hours, then 100mg/kg/hr for 16 hours

-   Patients with early-stage hepatic encephalopathy (grade I/II) have
    increased transplant free survival, while those with grade III/IV do
    not

    Treatment of Secondary Complications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infection: Rule out infection with CXR, Blood cultures, UA/UCx for
    every ALF. Antibiotics only if progressing HE, signs of infection,
    or development of SIRS

-   Cerebral edema/increased ICP:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   No role for lactulose in the setting of acute liver failure

-   Grade III-IV hepatic encephalopathy: elevated HOB to 30 degrees,
    quiet and dimly lit room, should be intubated, avoid sedating
    medications as feasible, and ICP monitor are recommended (if not
    feasible, hourly neuro checks can be an alternative). If ICP becomes
    elevated start targeted therapies to reduce intracranial pressure.

-   Mannitol or hypertonic saline should be administered for surges of
    ICP with consideration for short-term hyperventilation

-   If high ICP is refractory to osmotic agents, consider phenobarbital,
    indomethacin, and/or cooling to 33-34 degrees Celsius if awaiting LT

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Seizures: phenytoin (no evidence to support seizure ppx), short
    acting benzodiazepines if refractory

-   Renal Failure: early CRRT if persistent metabolic acidosis, volume
    overload, falling UOP

-   Coagulopathy: IV Vit K (at least one dose) routinely to rule out Vit
    K deficiency, products for invasive procedures or active bleeding
    only

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If trying to differentiate from DIC, can order Factor VIII level
    (should be normal/high in ALF; low in DIC)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Metabolic: Correction of hypoglycemia (continuous D20) and
    electrolyte abnormalities

-   Circulatory dysfunction/shock: Goal MAP \>75 mmHg. Ensure
    intravascularly replete, add norepinephrine first line, vasopressin
    can be used second line but may increase ICP. Consider stress dose
    steroids for refractory shock

-   Additional Supportive Care

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PPI for bleeding ppx

-   Enteral nutrition EARLY; avoid TPN if possible

-   Prefer propofol for sedation for better neuro exams and may reduce
    cerebral blood flow

Specific Management by Etiology:

-   Acetaminophen

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Early toxicology consultation if suspected ingestion/overdose

-   For acute management contact Poison Control 800-222-1222

-   Activated charcoal within 4 hours of ingestion, most effective
    within 1 hour

-   IV N-acetylcysteine per protocol, look up Rumack-Mattew Nomogram and
    consult with toxicology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In Epic: search "N-acetylcysteine" and select order set
    "Acetaminophen overdose"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   AFLP/HELLP -- delivery

-   Amanita phalloides -- IV fluid resuscitation, PO charcoal, IV
    penicillin, IV acetylcysteine

-   Autoimmune -- IV steroids following approval by hepatology (and
    typically post biopsy). Azathioprine generally deferred until
    cholestasis resolved (Mycophenolate can be used instead)

-   Budd-Chiari -- anticoagulation, IR-guided endovascular therapy,
    transplant (must rule out underlying malignancy and evaluate for
    thrombotic disorders)

-   HAV/HEV -- supportive care, consider ribavirin for ALF due to HEV

-   HBV -- nucleos(t)ide analogue; orthotopic liver transplant

-   HSV -- acyclovir, consider administering prophylactically until
    excluded based on lab work

Criteria for Transplantation:

-   King's College criteria: helps identify patients needing transplant
    referral/consideration

-   A\) ALF due to acetaminophen:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Arterial pH \<7.3 after resuscitation and \>24 hr since ingestion,
    OR

-   Arterial lactate \>3 after adequate fluid resuscitation, OR

-   Grade III- IV HE, and SCr \>3.4, and INR \>6.5 all within 24h period

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   B\) ALF not due to acetaminophen: INR \> 6.5 OR 3 of the 5 following
    criteria:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Etiology: Indeterminate etiology, idiosyncratic drug- induced
    hepatitis

-   Age \<10 or \>40

-   Interval of jaundice to onset of encephalopathy \>7 days

-   Bilirubin \> 17.5mg/dl (300mmol/L)

-   INR \>3.5

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other predictors of poor prognosis in absence of transplant:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hyperlactatemia: lactate \>3.5 after 4 hours of IVF or \>3 after 12
    hours IVF

-   Hyperphosphatemia: Phosphate \>3.75 at 48-96 hours

Non-Invasive Liver Testing for Liver Disease -- Shabnam Eghbali

Evaluation

-   Who should be evaluated: patients with steatosis noted on imaging or
    for whom there is a clinical suspicion of MASLD, such as those with
    metabolic risk factors (e.g., HTN, HLD, T2DM, obesity) or
    unexplained elevations in liver chemistries

-   Primary risk assessment for MASLD -\> FIB-4 -- estimates degree of
    scarring and is based on age, AST, ALT, platelet count; high
    negative predictive value to exclude advanced fibrosis (F3-4); less
    reliable in patients under the age of 35 or over the age of 65

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If FIB-4 \<1.3 -\> reassess periodically

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Every 1-2 years if T2DM/pre-T2DM or ≥2 metabolic risk factors

-   Every 2-3 years if no T2DM and \<2 metabolic risk factors

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If FIB-4 ≥ 1.3 -\> secondary risk assessment with elastography
    Vibration-controlled transient elastography (VCTE) also known as
    FibroScan if BMI \< 35 or MR elastography if BMI \> 35)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Low risk = VCTE \<8 kilopascal, MRE without significant fibrosis
    (F2-4), reassess periodically

-   Intermediate/high risk = VCTE \>8, MRE F2-4 -\> referral to
    Hepatology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If FIB-4 \> 2.67 -\> immediate referral to Hepatology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Secondary risk assessment for MASLD -\> (VCTE), also known as
    FibroScan, which provides following measurements:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CAP score (dB/m) -\> rough estimate of steatosis with relatively
    limited reliability

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   238 -- 260 -\> S1 (less 1/3 of liver affected by fatty change)

-   260 -- 290 -\> S2 (between 1/3 and 2/3 of liver affected by fatty
    change)

-   290 -- 400 -\> S3 (mor than 2/3 of liver affected by fatty change)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Liver stiffness (LSM) (kPa) -\> fibrosis score ... ranges differ
    based on underlying liver disease but approximately,

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   2 -- 7 -\> F0 to F1

-   8 -- 11 -\> F2

-   11 -- 14 -\> F3

-   14 or higher -\> F4

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Limitations to VCTE: not available at all centers, significant
    central adiposity that interferes with measurements, cardiac device
    not amenable to use of VCTE

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   AGILE 3+ -- a recently developed score based on combination of
    AST/ALT ratio, platelet count, diabetes, sex, age, LSM

-   Shear wave elastography interpretation:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ≤ 5 kPa -\> high probability of being normal

-   \< 9 kPa -\> In the abscence of other known clinical signs, rule out
    compensated advanced liver disease (cACLD). If there are known
    clinical signs, may need further test for confirmation

-   9-13 kPa suggestive of cACLD but need further test for confirmation

-   \> 13 kPa Rules in cACLD

-   \>17 kPa suggestive of clinically significant portal hypertension

Hospital Medicine

Editor: Christine Hamilton, MD

Reviewed by Chase J. Webber, DO

Lines and Catheters -- Seth Alexander

General guidance:

-   Primary goals of line/catheter management:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Know why it was placed

-   Know where it is going (venous, arterial, potential space)

-   Know what needs to happen before it can be removed

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Risk of infection: all foreign objects run the risk of introducing
    microbes during placement or becoming a nidus for microbial growth.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lines should only be placed when medically necessary and removed as
    medically appropriate.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   This chapter does not include additional forms of invasive
    monitoring devices (i.e., Swan Ganz catheters), surgical/procedural
    drains, or support devices (i.e., endotracheal tubes, ventricular
    assist devices, etc.) as these typically require subspecialty
    consultation/management for consideration and are discussed
    elsewhere.

Urinary Catheter:

-   Indications: surgery, immobilization, urinary retention, need for
    strict urine output monitoring (critical illness, diuresis), and
    open sacral/perineal wounds with incontinence

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Chronic foleys should typically be exchanged on admission

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Potential complications: Traumatic placement, difficult placement,
    and CAUTI

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Any concern for catheter obstruction should prompt urgent urology
    consult

-   Determine if coudé catheter placement attempted; can be useful in
    patients with BPH

-   Duration of use is the biggest risk factor for CAUTI; assess daily
    for need

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Criteria for removal: ability to void independently (with PVR
    follow-up) and resolution of placement indication

-   Alternate devices: Purewick catheter and condom catheter

Central venous catheter:

-   Central venous access can be obtained through large central venous
    catheters (internal jugular, subclavian, or femoral CVC) or
    peripherally inserted central catheters (PICC).

-   Indications: Vasoactive infusions (pressors, inotropes), long-term
    antibiotics, inability to obtain peripheral access, caustic agent
    administration (chemotherapy, antibiotics, etc), and total
    parenteral nutrition

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Note, single lumen PICC appropriate for most patients; double lumen
    typically reserved for special populations such as those in the ICU,
    on chemo, or on TPN

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Potential complications:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Arterial cannulation, air embolization, thrombus, or mispositioning
    during placement

-   Highest risk of insertion: femoral CVC

-   Pneumothorax: Subclavian CVC

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Criteria for removal: discontinuation of agents for which placement
    was indicated, transition to comfort care, or concern for central
    line associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI)

-   Alternative devices: peripheral venous access (consider US-guided)

-   There are indwelling catheters (tunneled ports, Hickman lines) which
    are more permanent central venous access devices used in patients
    with need for intermittent ventral venous access, typically placed
    by IR or surgery

Arterial Lines:

-   Indications: accurate blood pressure measurement, frequent arterial
    blood draws (ABG)

-   Potential complications: arterial occlusion (spasm, thrombus), with
    resultant ischemia, hematoma formation

-   Criteria for removal: resolution of placement criteria

Feeding Tubes:

-   Described in further detail below.

-   Placement: We can place dobhoff tubes or replace mature G-tubes

-   Troubleshooting: EGS consult for malposition/not functioning, wound
    consult for skin breakdown

-   G-tube study: 30mL Gastrograffin via tube \[resident often must
    push\] and KUB

Telemetry -- Ashley Ciosek

Background

-   Many monitored patients do not have a true indication

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Leads to alarm fatigue, unnecessary workups, and patient
    discomfort/delirium

-   Cost: about \$110 per patient per day

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Telemetry is not a substitute for more frequent vital signs

-   Discuss on rounds: reassess daily need and indication

-   Select "MAY" for transfers off telemetry and showering off telemetry
    among stable patients without troponin elevation or new arrythmia

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Clinical Scenario                 | Duration                          |
+===================================+===================================+
| **Cardiac**                       |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| ACS                               | 24-48h                            |
|                                   |                                   |
| Post-MI                           | 48h after revascularization       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Vasospastic angina                | Until symptoms resolve            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Any event requiring ICD shocks    | Remainder of hospitalization      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| New/unstable atrial               | Until stable on medical therapies |
| tachyarrhythmias                  |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Chronic AFib w/ recurrence of RVR | Clinical judgement                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Ventricular tachyarrhythmias      | Until definitive therapy          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Symptomatic bradycardia           | Until definitive therapy          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Decompensated CHF                 | Until underlying cause treated    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| **Procedural**                    |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Ablation (regardless of           | 12-24h after procedure            |
| co-morbidities)                   |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Cardiac surgery                   | 48-72h or until discharge if high |
|                                   | risk for decompensation           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Non-cardiac major surgery in      | Until discharge from step-down or |
| patient with AFib risk factors    | ICU                               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Conscious sedation                | Until patient awake, alert, HDS   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| **Miscellaneous**                 |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Endocarditis                      | Until clinically stable           |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| CVA                               | 24-48h                            |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Electrolyte derangement (K, Mg)   | Until normalization               |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Hemodialysis                      | Clinical judgement                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Drug overdose                     | Until free of influence of        |
|                                   | substance                         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

Notable non-indications

-   Rate-controlled afib + clinically stable

-   Chronic PVCs

-   ESRD on HD

-   PCI for non-ACS indication (e.g. pre-transplant)

-   Non-cardiac chest pain

-   Patient with AICD admitted for non-cardiac condition, non-cardiac
    surgery, chronic rate-controlled AFib

-   Nearly all non-cardiac conditions (e.g. undifferentiated sepsis,
    stable GI bleed, alcohol withdrawal) upon transfer out of ICU

-   Patient in hospice/comfort care

High Quality Handovers − Christine Hamilton

Vanderbilt IM uses the "handoff" tab in eStar. Update all components of
the handover daily:

Synopsis

-   Include patient's name, age, pertinent medical history, and key
    hospital diagnoses/events. For example: "John Doe is a 57-year-old
    man with a past medical history of HTN and HLD who presented with
    NSTEMI, now s/p LHC on 3/7, on DAPT.

-   Include code status and, if applicable, capacity to leave AMA

    To-dos

-   Should be very specific, and instructions should contain the time a
    task should be performed, the task itself, and actionable
    recommendations. For example: "21:00 -- Follow-up intake/output. If
    urine output is less than 2L, order 160mg IV Lasix."

    Contingencies

-   Should include instructions for common overnight pages as well as
    patient-specific recommendations. At a minimum, contingencies should
    address: pain, fever, nausea, hypoxia, hemodynamic instability,
    tachycardia, and AMS.

    When giving verbal handoff for complicated patients, use the I-PASS
    technique:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   I: Illness severity (stable, watcher, unstable)

-   P: Patient summary (one-liner with working/confirmed diagnosis, key
    elements of hospital course including major medication
    changes/procedures/interventions, and any pertinent physical exam
    findings or lab result (important particularly if a patient has
    known neuro exam findings, baseline severe hyponatremia, etc in the
    event they are called about this)

-   A: Action list: formatted as to-do's, above

-   S: Situation awareness: i.e., contingency planning

-   S: Synthesis by receiver: summarize the pertinent diagnoses, action
    list, and clarify any questions

Transitions of Care: Discharge Planning -- Christine Hamilton

Discharge from hospital represents a period of vulnerability for
patients. Medical errors (especially medication errors) following
discharge are exceedingly common and can lead to adverse events.

On Admission:

-   Admission checklist: verify PCP, primary specialty providers, social
    support, current living situation, and functional status at the time
    of admission

-   Track any new meds, held/stopped meds, and med dose changes from the
    beginning

-   Consult PT/OT early for anyone who you anticipate may need home
    health services or need to be discharged to any location besides
    home

    During hospitalization:

-   Consider barriers to discharge daily and discuss on rounds

-   Discuss barriers to discharge, anticipated discharge destination,
    and any other needs in huddle

-   Track any incidental findings or things for PCP to follow-up (e.g.,
    incidental nodules on scans: use .vnincidental)

-   Discuss expected discharge timing daily with patient and family if
    possible, to set expectations

On discharge day:

-   **Communicate with patient's outpatient team (e.g. PCP)**

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Typically achieved through the discharge summary

    -   Include a list of specific, actionable follow-up tasks and
        assign a responsible party. Place in easy-to-view spot at the
        top of the summary

        -   E.g., Instead of writing "follow-up BMP after initiation of
            furosemide," write "PCP to check BMP in 2 weeks after
            initiation of furosemide"

        -   Include any pending studies and appointments from hospital
            admission

    -   All relevant parties should receive a copy of the discharge
        summary (see appendices

        section for mechanics of discharge process)

        -   It is useful to send patient with a printed copy of the
            discharge summary if they will follow-up outside VUMC

-   For high-risk discharges (poor health literacy, hx of being lost to
    follow-up, follow up outside VUMC), consider calling PCP's office to
    set follow-up

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   **Complete an accurate and thorough medication reconciliation**

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Utilize the Pharmacy consult to assist with reconciliation. Follow
    the following 3 steps: verification (perform medication history),
    clarification (check medication name and doses), and reconciliation
    (record medication changes)

    -   Keep a list of any held or changed medications in your hospital
        course.

    -   Review changes on rounds/with pharmacist on day of (or prior to)
        discharge

-   Highlight any significant medication changes on discharge summary

    -   Can include as follow-up tasks if pertinent

-   Be sure to communicate any changes with the patient and/or caregiver

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   **Ensure that appropriate resources and follow-up appointments have
    been requested**

-   **Effectively communicate discharge plan to patient**

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Discuss medication changes, tasks for patient to complete, follow-up
    appointments

    -   Key points should also be written in the patient instructions
        box

    -   Useful to include educational sheets in the AVS (searchable in
        discharge navigator)

    -   Utilize teach-back method to ensure your instructions were
        effectively communicated

At VUMC we are fortunate to have the Discharge Care Center

-   Multidisciplinary team including nurses, social workers, care
    coordinators, and pharmacists

-   Phone number is included on discharge paperwork, and patients can
    contact them 24/7. The DCC also reaches out to patients through an
    automated system

AMA Discharges − Christine Hamilton

Patients who leave AMA are significantly more likely to have hospital
readmissions and have higher mortality rates. If paged from the bedside
about a patient requesting to leave AMA, call nurse back and then go
speak with the patient.

1.  Address patient concerns (i.e. pain control, substance withdrawal,
    fear/anxiety, financial strain, diet) to address reversible causes
    for contention.

2.  Determine capacity to leave: review risks of leaving and medical
    reasoning to stay (see Medical Decision-Making Capacity under
    "Psychiatry"). This discussion should be witnessed by nurse or
    charge nurse if possible. Provider and patient will need to sign AMA
    discharge form, which nurse can obtain.

3.  Send new medications to pharmacy and request hospital follow-up
    visits if patient leaves

4.  Sign discharge order. In the "discharge to" section select "left
    against medical advice" (for more detailed discharge instructions,
    see appendices)

5.  Clearly document in discharge summary that patient was informed
    about the risks of leaving, had the capacity to make the decision to
    leave, and left AMA.

    \*Caveat: if patient at any point becomes threatening or you feel
    unsafe, allow them to leave or contact security

Wounds − Adapted from Dr. Duggan's Geriatrics Guide

To do when admitting a patient with wounds

-   Document ALL wounds that are present on admission. This affects
    reimbursement.

-   Use the Haiku app on your cell phone to document images of wounds in
    chart.

-   Wound Service hours are Monday through Friday, 6 AM - 2 PM

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If there is a an urgent/emergent wound need (e.g. needs surgical
    eval or management), consult the appropriate surgical service.

-   While awaiting consultation, initiate topical wound care orders
    (detailed below)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider contributing factors: nutritional, pressure-offloading
    equipment, wound supplies, PT/OT, and home health nursing.

Types of wounds

-   Abscess - Ischemic ulcers / gangrene

-   Arterial wound - Pressure Injury

-   Calciphylaxis - Pyoderma gangrenosum

-   Diabetic foot wound - Skin tear

-   Fistula - Vasculitis

-   Fungating lesion - Venous leg wound

Vascular Wound Etiologies

-   Arterial: located on distal ends of digits, shallow, well-defined
    borders, pale/necrotic wound bed, minimal exudate due to poor blood
    flow, cramping pain or a constant deep ache

-   Diabetic: plantar surface of foot, callused wound margins; usually
    painless due to neuropathy

-   Venous: located on medial malleolus or gravity dependent areas,
    irregular edges, ruddy red with yellow slough and copious exudate

Non-Acute Wound Consult Guidelines

-   Order "Inpatient Consult to Adult Wound\" for these wound types:
    diabetic foot wounds, venous, arterial, pressure injuries (consult
    required for DTI, stage 3, 4, and unstageable), IV infiltrate, skin
    tears, moisture-associated dermatitis, calciphylaxis, vasculitis,
    pyoderma gangrenosum, fungating lesion, abscess, surgical wounds, or
    wound VAC

    -   Diabetic foot wounds: if patient is followed by podiatry, order
        \"Inpatient Consult to Podiatry\"

    -   Abscess: if chronic due to IBD, consult Colorectal Surgery

    -   Surgical wounds: if patient has a VUMC surgeon, consult the
        respective surgical service

-   Order \"Inpatient Consult to Adult Ostomy / Fistula / Tube\" for
    ostomy, trach, PEG, associated needs or complications (etc.)

Acute Wound Consult Guidelines

-   Abscess, hematoma, or osteomyelitis with overlying wound -- whom to
    consult for drainage/debridement:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Face: Face

-   Chest/Sternum: CT surgery

-   Breast: General surgery

-   Spine: Spine

-   Arm (hand to elbow): Hand

-   Lower leg (foot to knee): Ortho

-   Labial: OB/GYN

-   Scrotal: Urology

-   Buttock, thigh (knee to hip), arm (elbow to shoulder): EGS consult

-   Perirectal/Rectal acute abscess: EGS; (chronic due to IBD --
    Colorectal Surgery)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Necrotizing Fasciitis -- whom to consult for URGENT/EMERGENT
    surgical eval:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Genitalia: Urology

-   Buttocks, perineum, abdomen: EGS

-   Upper extremity (shoulder to hand) : Hand

-   Lower extremity (hip to toes): Ortho

Pressure Injury Staging

+----------+-----------+---------+----------+---------+--------------+
| Feature  | Deep      | Stage 1 | Stage 2  | Stage 3 | Stage 4      |
|          | Tissue    |         |          |         |              |
|          | Injury    |         |          |         |              |
+==========+===========+=========+==========+=========+==============+
| Skin     | boggy     | boggy   | Variable | N/A     | N/A          |
| Con      |           |         |          |         |              |
| sistency |           |         |          |         |              |
+----------+-----------+---------+----------+---------+--------------+
| Skin     | non-      | non-bl  | a        | v       | Variable.    |
| Color/   | blanching | anching | brasion, | ariable |              |
|          | purple or | e       | blister, |         | If eschar,   |
| Nature   | maroon,   | rythema | or       |         | must be      |
| of       | may look  |         | shallow  |         | removed to   |
| Lesion   | like      |         | crater   |         | stage, or is |
|          | blood     |         |          |         | unstageable  |
|          | blister   |         |          |         |              |
+----------+-----------+---------+----------+---------+--------------+
| Depth    | epidermis | ep      | through  | SQ      | fu           |
|          | intact    | idermis | surface  | tissue  | ll-thickness |
|          |           | intact  | of       | to, but | w/           |
|          |           |         | e        | not     | destruction, |
|          |           |         | pidermis | t       | necrosis, or |
|          |           |         | and      | hrough, | damage to    |
|          |           |         | outer    | fascia  | muscle,      |
|          |           |         | dermis   |         | bone,        |
|          |           |         |          |         | supporting   |
|          |           |         |          |         | structures   |
+----------+-----------+---------+----------+---------+--------------+

Wound Care (order while awaiting consultant recs)

-   Superficial wounds

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stage 1 or 2 pressure injuries, moisture-associated skin damage, or
    skin tears

    -   Order "Adult Skin Care Guidelines" and use the order set to
        guide you

-   Shallow Stage 3 pressure injuries (i.e., \<1cm deep) or diabetic
    foot ulcers

    -   Order "Wound Care": Frequency 2x weekly and prn; cleanse with
        NS; protect periwound with Mepilex foam (type in comments)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Painful superficial wounds with no infection (i.e. vasculitis, PG,
    calciphylaxis)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Order "Wound Care": Frequency 2 times daily; cleanse with NS; apply
    Vaseline; protect periwound with Xeroform and dry gauze (type in
    comments)

    -   If wound is on the hand, arm, foot, or lower leg consider
        wrapping in Kerlix

    -   If wound is on the trunk (i.e., abdomen or buttocks), consider
        covering with an ABD pad and secure with medipore tape

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infected superficial wounds

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Odor alone does NOT indicate infection; wounds with necrotic tissue
    may have odor

-   Order "Wound Care": Frequency 2 times daily; Cleanse with NS, Apply
    Silvadene; Protect periwound with Xeroform and dry gauze (type in
    comments)

    -   If wound is on hand, arm, foot, or lower leg consider wrapping
        in a Kerlix

    -   If wound is on the trunk (i.e., abdomen or buttocks), consider
        covering with an ABD pad and secure with medipore tape

-   Medication order required: Silvadene q12h; in Admin Inst put "per
    wound care orders"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Deep wounds (i.e., stage 3, 4, or deep diabetic foot wound (all
    \>1cm deep))

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Order "Wound Care": Frequency 2 times daily; Cleanse with NS, pack
    with Dakin's 0.025% (1/20 strength) soaked continuous Kerlix roll;
    Protect periwound with ABD pad & medipore tape (type in comments)

-   If wound care is painful, consider changing to daily dressing
    changes

-   Medication order required: Dakin's 0.025% solution q12h; in Admin
    Inst put "per wound care orders"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Deep tissue injury

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Medication order required: Venelex (balsam peru- castor oil)
    ointment q4h; in admin instructions put location to apply ointment
    and put "no dressing"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fungating mass

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Order "Wound Care": Frequency 2 times daily; Cleanse with baby
    shampoo and water, NS, Metrogel (type in comments); Protect with
    Xeroform, ABD pad, medipore tape

-   Medication order required: metrogel q12h; in Admin Inst put "per
    wound care orders"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Wound VAC

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Vanderbilt surgeon -- consult Vanderbilt provider to provide care

    -   Ensure connected to VUMC wound VAC. Pt shouldn't use home unit
        while admitted

    -   Order "nursing communication" to "Obtain wound VAC hospital
        machine and canister from service center to connect patient to
        hospital machine."

    -   Wound VAC should not be left without suction for more than 2
        hours

    -   Settings: 125 mmHg continuous

-   Non VUMC surgeon (i.e., gets wound care at outside hospital/wound
    care center)

    -   Discontinue wound VAC as soon as possible.

    -   Remove all of the clear plastic drape just like you would remove
        tape

    -   Remove all of the sponge just like you would remove gauze
        packing

    -   Examine the wound to ensure no residual sponge by gently probing
        site

    -   Rinse with saline, initiate care based wound type as above

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Leg wrap

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ex: Unna\'s boot, ACE and 2-, 3-, or 4-layer compression

-   Remove by cutting the wrap off

-   Assess the wound and order dressing based on type of wound as above

-   Order ACE bandage wrapped toe-to-knee. Remove q12h to assess skin

Enteral Nutrition -- Christine Hamilton

Indications for enteral feeding: high nutrition risk with inability to
tolerate PO intake

-   Guidelines recommend calculating nutritional risk based on validated
    scoring tool (e.g. Malnutrition Screening Tool). This is usually
    completed by the nutrition team.

-   Recognize who would benefit from nutrition consult to assist with
    risk determination.

-   Patients with \>5% weight loss in past 1-3 months or decreased oral
    intake coupled with increased metabolic demands due to medical
    illness or surgery.

-   Patients with low nutritional risk may not need enteral feeding if
    it is anticipated they will resume intake in 5-7 days

-   Critically ill patients: goal is early initiation of tube feeding
    (within 48 hours)

Contraindications to enteral nutrition

-   Bowel obstruction or severe ileus

-   Ischemic bowel

-   Acute peritonitis

-   Major gastrointestinal bleeding

-   Intractable vomiting

-   Significant hemodynamic instability

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Patients who are not adequately volume resuscitated and have
    significant hemodynamic instability (e.g. high pressor requirements)
    are thought to be at increased risk for bowel ischemia.

-   Pressors in general are not a contraindication to tube feeds. Okay
    to start once pressors are down-trending or at a stable level.

    Obtaining enteral access:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Typically place nasogastric or orogastric feeding tube in acute
    setting. See "Procedures" section for tips on placement.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For most patients, enteral feeding is safe with gastric tube
    placement.

-   Consider post-pyloric placement for patients with high aspiration
    risk, impaired gastric motility, or patients who have demonstrated
    intolerance with gastric feeding.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube placement if
    anticipate enteral nutrition \>4 weeks

    Choice of formula and rate: Place Nutrition consult

-   Okay to start tube feeds prior to recommendations and adjust later,
    especially if recommendations will be delayed.

-   25-30 cal/kg (use ideal body weight for most patients, use actual
    weight for underweight patient) to estimate daily needs.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most common formulas at VUMC: Nutren 1.5 (1.5 cal/ml), Novasource
    renal (2 cal/ml)

-   Patients may need additional free water (most tube feed formulas are
    comprised of 80-85% water but varies with type). Typically dose as
    bolus of free water every 4-6 hours. May empirically try 250cc free
    water q4h and monitor Na trends. May need more if already with a
    large fluid deficit (e.g. hypernatremia) or if high volume losses.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Calculate hourly rate based on daily calorie need and formula
    calorie density

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ex: Patient with IBW of 70Kg will need estimated 1,750 calories per
    day (70 x 25 cal/kg. If using Nutren 1.5, this will equal 1,167 ml
    per day (1,750 divided by 1.5 calories per ml). This would equal a
    goal rate of about 50ml per hour (rounded up) of Nutren 1.5

-   Resources for quick calculations:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Search for "tube feed cheat sheet" on google and will find reference
    tables on EMCrit.org that gives you rate per hour for different
    weights and formula types

-   Clincalc.com also has a useful enteral nutrition calculator

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Start initially at a low rate (such as 10 mL/hr) to assess
    tolerability and advance to goal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If no concern for refeeding syndrome, typically increase by 10cc/hr
    q6h

-   If risk for refeeding syndrome or other issues with tolerability,
    typically advance more slowly over several days

    Condensing to bolus feeds:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Typically begin condensing by providing 4 bolus meals per day run
    over 2 hours, then shorten run time to \~30 minutes or by gravity

-   NOTE: J-tube cannot be bolused; if condensing feeds for patients
    receiving enteral nutrition via J-tube, typically you can increase
    the rate to run all nutrition over 10-14 hours to allow the patient
    freedom from the pump

Potential Complications

-   Aspiration

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Recommendation to keep head of bed elevated at 30 to 45 degrees (low
    quality, mixed evidence). Consider risks of this positioning (e.g.
    formation of pressure ulcers)

-   Consider post-pyloric placement if issues with aspiration (low
    quality, mixed evidence)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diarrhea or constipation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider wheat dextrin fiber supplement (low quality evidence) but
    discontinue if not associated with clinical improvement. Avoid less
    soluble fibers such as psyllium due to risk of clogging tube. Avoid
    in patients with reduced GI motility due to rare risk of bezoar
    formation.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hyperglycemia: See Endocrine section for management

-   Refeeding syndrome

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Monitor q8 hour Mg, phos, K in high-risk patients (underweight,
    recent weight loss, prolonged poor intake) and advance to goal
    slowly

Guidelines for Pregnant Patients -- Christine Hamilton

Bacteriuria:

-   Acute cystitis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Treatment: empiric with cephalexin, cefpodoxime,
    amoxicillin-clavulanate, Fosfomycin. Nitrofurantoin and Bactrim
    typically avoided in first trimester and near term but safe to try
    if no appropriate alternatives. Tailor based on culture results.
    Treat for 5-7 days.

-   If UA negative but patient with symptoms of dysuria, obtain STI
    testing

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pyelonephritis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Higher incidence in pregnancy compared to non-pregnant women, most
    often in second/third trimesters

-   Risk factors: Age \<20y, nulliparity, smoking, late presentation to
    care, sickle cell trait, and pre-existing (not gestational) diabetes

-   Associated with preterm birth

-   Diagnosis: fever, flank pain, nausea/vomiting, and/or dysuria with
    bacteriuria. Rule out intraamniotic infection, placental abruption

-   Management: Patients typically require admission. Obtain blood
    cultures and initiate IV antibiotics for 1st 24-48hrs; beta-lactams
    (CTX or Zosyn) preferred. Avoid fluoroquinolones.

-   De-escalation: Once afebrile for 48 hours, switch to PO beta-lactam
    (preferred) for total 7-10 days.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Asymptomatic bacteriuria:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Occurs in 2-7% of pregnant women, most often in first trimester

-   Without treatment, \~25% of pregnant women will develop symptomatic
    UTI

-   Complications of untreated bacteriuria associated with preterm
    birth, low birth weight, and perinatal mortality in some studies

-   Diagnosis: pyuria and \>100,000 cfu/mL bacteria

Refractory Nausea/Vomiting:

-   Presentation: hormone mediated nausea/vomiting typically starting
    before 9wks GA

-   Differential: gastroenteritis, hepatitis, biliary tract disease,
    obstruction, pancreatitis, pyelonephritis, nephrolithiasis, ovarian
    torsion, DKA, hyperparathyroidism, migraines, preeclampsia

-   Workup: BMP, mg, phos, LFTs, lipase (may be mildly elevated in HG),
    UA

-   Treatment:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   1st line: ginger, doxylamine (25mg PO q6h), pyridoxine (20mg PO q6h)

-   2nd line: diphenhydramine (25-50mg q6h), metoclopramide (10mg q6h),
    promethazine (12.5mg q6h), or compazine (5-10mg q6h)

-   3rd Line: ondansetron (8mg q12h, after 1st trimester)

-   Hydration: 1L LR on admission + banana bag q24hrs

Hypertension:

-   Both gestational HTN and preeclampsia/HELLP are typically diagnosed
    \>20w GA

-   Tx options: nifedipine, labetalol, methyldopa, hydral (2nd line),
    clonidine (2nd line)

-   Avoid: ACEi, ARB, MRA, nitroprusside

Diabetes

-   Due to hormonal changes associated with pregnancy, pregnant patients
    are at higher risk for poor control and DKA. Poorly controlled
    diabetes is also associated with congenital anomalies of the fetus
    and early pregnancy loss.

-   Medication: Metformin and Insulin preferred. GLP-1 agonists, SGLT-2
    inhibitors, and DPP-4 inhibitors should be discontinued.

-   Consider starting ASA 81mg to reduce risk for preeclampsia

GERD:

-   1st line: lifestyle and dietary medication

-   2nd line: antacids or sucralfate 1g PO TID. Avoid sodium bicarbonate
    and magnesium

-   3rd line: Histamine 2 receptor antagonists such as cimetidine 200mg
    (30min prior to eating)

-   4th line: PPI such as omeprazole or pantoprazole

Asthma:

-   Similar rescue and controller medications as in non-pregnant patient

-   Would favor using LABA \> leukotriene receptor antagonists for
    additional therapy

    Obtaining Imaging:

-   A missed or delayed diagnosis can pose a greater risk to patients
    and their pregnancy than the hazard associated with ionizing
    radiation

-   Discuss with radiologist when ordering; often adjustments can be
    made in pregnancy that maintain imaging integrity and utility

-   In general, should limit fetal ionizing radiation exposure to \<50
    mGy (for reference, a two-view CXR is \~0.01mGy, a KUB is \~2 mGy,
    and a pelvic CT is anywhere from 10-50 mGy. Iodinated contrast is
    not contraindicated but can cross the placenta and depress fetal
    thyroid.

-   MRI is safe in pregnancy and in some cases preferred, particularly
    in the first trimester however gadolinium contrast should generally
    be avoided unless absolutely necessary.

Infectious Diseases

Editor: Alexis Froehlich, MD

Reviewed by: L. Nicholas Herrera, MD, Sharon Onguti, MD, MPH and Sean
Kelly, MD

General Tips

-   Vanderbilt Antibiotics Stewardship Program (VASP) has a
    [website](https://www.vumc.org/antimicrobial-stewardship-program/)
    with VUMC antibiograms, local resistance patterns

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cross reference with IDSA guidelines to ensure the most up to date
    care.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Does your pt need to be on precautions? Check the [Infection
    Prevention Website](https://www.vumc.org/infectioncontrol/12177)
    under 'isolation' tab or page the infection control pager in E-star
    paging for additional questions

-   Page 317-4376 for approval of restricted antimicrobials at VUMC
    (page the VA ID fellow at the VA)

-   Both lab [and]{.underline} clinicians are required by law to report
    diagnosis and treatment for reportable disease

Bacteremia: Interpreting GenMark ePlex® Results -- VASP

Background

-   When BCx turn positive, the lab reports Gram stain and GenMark
    ePlex® results to help guide empiric therapy, while awaiting further
    species identification and susceptibilities.

Management

-   Start empiric antibiotic therapy (based on clinical picture and
    table below)

-   Consider ordering repeat BCx x2 based on organism to document
    clearance

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Repeat for: Staph (MRSA or MSSA), Staph lugdunensis

-   If source control & no endovascular infxn, no need to repeat (most
    other strep and GNR's)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   [VUMC
    antibiograms](https://www.vumc.org/antimicrobial-stewardship-program/antibiograms)
    can be used to reference typical resistance patterns and most common
    organisms in blood cultures.

-   *Candida* in a blood culture is NEVER considered a contaminant

Gram Positive Cocci 

Some gram-positive cocci in blood cultures are NEVER considered a
contaminant whereas other gram-positive cocci are often contaminants.
See algorithm for interpreting GPC in blood cultures on VASP website.

+-------------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
| > Organism              | > Resistance      | > Preliminary         |
|                         | > Marker          | > Recommendation      |
+=========================+===================+=======================+
| Staphylococcus aureus   | mecA detected     | Start vancomycin IV   |
|                         |                   |                       |
| > or                    |                   |                       |
|                         |                   |                       |
| Staphylococcus          |                   |                       |
| lugdunensis             |                   |                       |
|                         |                   |                       |
| **ID Consult REQUIRED** |                   |                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | No mecA detected  | Start nafcillin or    |
|                         |                   | cefazolin             |
|                         |                   |                       |
|                         |                   | Stop empiric          |
|                         |                   | vancomycin IV         |
+-------------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
| Staphylococcus          | mecA detected     | Start vancomycin IV   |
| epidermidis             |                   |                       |
|                         |                   |                       |
| -Often skin contaminant |                   |                       |
|                         |                   |                       |
| -Repeat cultures, start |                   |                       |
| therapy if uncertain    |                   |                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | No mecA detected  | Start nafcillin or    |
|                         |                   | cefazolin             |
|                         |                   |                       |
|                         |                   | Stop empiric          |
|                         |                   | vancomycin IV         |
+-------------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
| Other coagulase         |                   | Start vancomycin IV   |
| negative *Staph*        |                   |                       |
|                         |                   |                       |
| -Often skin contaminant |                   |                       |
|                         |                   |                       |
| -Repeat cultures, start |                   |                       |
| abx if uncertain        |                   |                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
| Streptococcus:          |                   | Start penicillin IV   |
| agalactiae, pyogenes,   |                   | or CTX IV             |
| anginosus               |                   |                       |
|                         |                   | Stop empiric          |
|                         |                   | vancomycin            |
+-------------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
| Streptococcus           |                   | Start ceftriaxone     |
| pneumoniae              |                   |                       |
|                         |                   | Stop empiric          |
|                         |                   | vancomycin            |
|                         |                   |                       |
|                         |                   | Await PCN sensitivity |
|                         |                   | data                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
| Other *Streptococcus*   |                   | Start ceftriaxone     |
|                         |                   |                       |
| -May be contaminant     |                   | Stop empiric          |
|                         |                   | vancomycin            |
|                         |                   |                       |
|                         |                   | Await PCN sensitivity |
|                         |                   | data                  |
+-------------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
| Enterococcus faecalis   | vanA or vanB      | Start daptomycin      |
|                         | detected          | 8-10mg/kg/day IV      |
| **ID Consult REQUIRED** |                   |                       |
|                         |                   | Don't treat w         |
|                         |                   | vancomycin IV         |
|                         |                   |                       |
|                         |                   | Contact precautions   |
+-------------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | No vanA or vanB   | Start ampicillin      |
|                         |                   |                       |
|                         |                   | Stop empiric          |
|                         |                   | vancomycin IV         |
+-------------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
| Enterococcus faecium    | vanA or vanB      | Start daptomycin      |
|                         | detected          | 8-10mg/kg/day IV      |
| **ID Consult REQUIRED** |                   |                       |
|                         |                   | Don't treat w         |
|                         |                   | vancomycin IV         |
|                         |                   |                       |
|                         |                   | Contact precautions   |
+-------------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
|                         | No vanA or vanB   | Start vancomycin IV   |
|                         |                   |                       |
|                         |                   | Follow-up ampicillin  |
|                         |                   | sensitivities         |
+-------------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
| Micrococcus             |                   | Repeat BCx            |
|                         |                   |                       |
| -Often if in a single   |                   | Start vancomycin IV   |
| blood culture is skin   |                   | if uncertain          |
| contaminant             |                   |                       |
+-------------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+

Gram Positive Rods

+--------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| > Organism                     | > Preliminary Recommendation        |
+================================+=====================================+
| *Listeria monocytogenes*       | Start ampicillin                    |
|                                |                                     |
|                                | Stop empiric vancomycin IV          |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Other Gram positive rod (eg    | Start vancomycin IV                 |
| Bacillus cereus,               |                                     |
| Corynebacterium, Cutibacterium | Follow-up sensitivities; some GPRs  |
| acnes, Lactobacillus)          | are resistant to vancomycin         |
|                                |                                     |
| -Often skin contaminant        |                                     |
|                                |                                     |
| -Repeat cultures, start        |                                     |
| therapy if uncertain           |                                     |
+--------------------------------+-------------------------------------+

Gram Negative Rods \*Consult ID if carbapenem resistance detected\*

+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| **Organism**        | **Preliminary Recommendation**                 |
+=====================+================================================+
| Acinetobacter       | Start ampicillin/sulbactam                     |
| baumannii           |                                                |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Bacteroides         | Start metronidazole                            |
| fragilis            |                                                |
|                     | If polymicrobial infection,                    |
|                     | piperacillin/tazobactam, ampicillin/sulbactam, |
|                     | or meropenem based on other organisms          |
|                     |                                                |
|                     | Do NOT double cover anaerobes                  |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Citrobacter spp.    | Start/continue cefepime                        |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Cronobacter         | Start/continue cefepime                        |
| sakazakii           |                                                |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Enterobacter        | Start/continue cefepime                        |
| (non-cloacae        |                                                |
| complex)            |                                                |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Enterobacter        | Start/continue cefepime                        |
| cloacae complex     |                                                |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Escherichia coli    | Continue empiric coverage and await            |
|                     | susceptibilities                               |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Fusobacterium       | Start ampicillin/sulbactam or start/continue   |
| nucleatum           | metronidazole                                  |
|                     |                                                |
| Fusobacterium       |                                                |
| necrophorum         |                                                |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Haemophilus         | Start/continue ceftriaxone                     |
| influenzae          |                                                |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Klebsiella oxytoca  | Continue empiric coverage and await            |
|                     | susceptibilities                               |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Klebsiella          | Continue empiric coverage and await            |
| pneumoniae group    | susceptibilities                               |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Morganella morganii | Start/continue cefepime                        |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Neisseria           | Continue empiric coverage and await            |
| meningitidis        | susceptibilities                               |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Proteus spp.        | Continue empiric coverage and await            |
|                     | susceptibilities                               |
| Proteus mirabilis   |                                                |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Pseudomonas         | Start/continue cefepime or                     |
| aeruginosa          | piperacillin-tazobactam                        |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Salmonella spp      | Start/continue ceftriaxone                     |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Serratia spp.       | Start/continue cefepime                        |
|                     |                                                |
| Serratia marcescens |                                                |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Stenotrophomonas    | Start trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole            |
| maltophilia         | (15-20mg/kg/day divided q8h for normal renal   |
|                     | function)                                      |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| Gram-Negative       |                                                |
| Resistance Genes    |                                                |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| CTX-M Positive      | Start meropenem                                |
| (ESBL)              |                                                |
|                     | Consider an Infectious Diseases consult        |
|                     |                                                |
|                     | Contact precautions (see Infection Prevention  |
|                     | website)                                       |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+
| IMP Positive        | Carbapenemase-producing organism               |
|                     |                                                |
| KPC Positive        | Obtain Infectious Disease consultation         |
|                     |                                                |
| NDM Positive        | Contact precautions (see Infection Prevention  |
|                     | website)                                       |
| OXA (OXA-23 and     |                                                |
| OXA-48) Positive    |                                                |
|                     |                                                |
| VIM Positive        |                                                |
+---------------------+------------------------------------------------+

Central Nervous System Infection -- VASP

Bacterial Meningitis

Evaluation

-   Blood cultures prior to antibiotics if possible

-   Head CT pre-LP, only if: Immunocompromised, hx of CNS diseases
    (shunts, trauma, tumors), papilledema on exam or FND, AMS, or new
    onset seizure.

-   If there is a delay in obtaining head CT or LP, DO NOT delay
    antibiotics.

-   Lumbar puncture (See Procedures Section):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Obtain: Opening pressure, cell count + differential, glucose,
    protein, bacterial culture

-   Send an extra tube or two of CSF to the lab, if possible, to be
    frozen in case extra testing is needed (Order 'Miscellaneous test'
    and for test name put "Please freeze CSF in virology;" reference
    lab: VUMC, specimen type: CSF)

-   Additional studies to consider in select pts: HSV 1, 2 PCR (NOT
    antibodies), VZV PCR, VDRL, Crypto Ag, fungal and/or AFB cultures,
    MTB PCR, West Nile Virus Ab, Enterovirus PCR, Histoplasma Ag, or
    Biofire Meningitis/Encephalitis Panel. These should not be performed
    routinely on all pts and consult ID where management questions
    exist.

-   If Biofire Meningitis/Encephalitis Panel is performed, double check
    what is included to avoid sending duplicate individual tests (ie
    HSV, VZV, enterovirus, etc.) A negative cryptococcus on Biofire does
    not exclude disease (CSF Crypto Ag is more sensitive)

Management

-   Antibiotics as soon as possible

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ceftriaxone 2g IV q12h + Vancomycin, adjusted for renal function

-   Piperacillin-tazobactam cannot be used due to poor CNS penetration

-   IV ampicillin 2g q4h for optional coverage of Listeria for
    immunocompromised pts, pregnant women, or age \>50 (adjust based on
    renal function)

-   IV acyclovir 10 mg/kg (based on adjusted body weight) q8h, if
    suspected HSV or VZV meningitis, make sure to run with adequate
    pre-hydration with NS

-   Consider empiric PO/IV doxycycline 100mg BID if tick-borne illness
    is suspected

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Steroids: IDSA guidelines-steroids (dexamethasone 0.15 mg/kg q6h)
    should be given 10-20 minutes before the first dose of abx, or at
    the same time, in pts with suspected bacterial meningitis. IF
    pneumococcus is isolated, continue IV steroids for 2-4 days;
    otherwise, can discontinue

-   ID consultation: Duration should be guided by ID and varies based on
    organism recovered

Encephalitis

Background

-   The presence or absence of normal brain function/cognition is the
    important distinguishing clinical feature between encephalitis and
    meningitis

Evaluation

-   MRI more sensitive that CT, although imaging may or may not
    demonstrate abnormal radiographic findings in pts with encephalitis

-   LP -- similar studies as for meningitis (see above) + BioFire MEP
    for ALL pts

Management

-   Acyclovir 10mg/kg IV q8hr (based on adjusted body weight),
    consideration of antibacterial therapy if unable to conclusively
    exclude a bacterial meningitis, consideration of doxycycline if
    tick-borne infection is on the differential, and further treatment
    as guided by ID

-   ID consult is strongly encouraged for all pts with suspected
    encephalitis

Brain Abscess

Evaluation/Management

-   Consult: Neurosurgery and ID

-   Blood Cultures, HIV testing in any pt with a brain lesion

-   Empiric antibiotics:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IV Vancomycin (dose per PK) + ceftriaxone 2g IV q12h + metronidazole
    500mg IV/PO q6h

-   If concern for extension from otitis externa, use an antipseudomonal
    cephalosporin (cefepime 2g IV Q8h) instead of ceftriaxone

-   Brain abscesses generally polymicrobial, thus broad-spectrum
    antibiotics indicated

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Aminoglycosides, macrolides, tetracyclines (e.g. doxycycline),
    clindamycin, beta-lactam/beta-lactamase combinations (e.g., Zosyn)
    and 1st-generation cephalosporins (e.g., cefazolin) should NOT be
    used as they do not cross BBB at high concentration.

-   Antibiotic Duration: based on surgical drainage and ID guidance

Epidural Abscess

Management

-   If spinal lesion, consult 'Spine surgery' and it will be directed to
    Ortho-Spine or Neurosurgery, depending on who is on call.

-   Abx should be started as soon as the diagnosis of epidural abscess
    is suspected, immediately following the collection of two sets of
    blood cultures

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Vancomycin 15-20mg/kg IV q8-12h (adjusted for renal function) +
    ceftriaxone 2g IV q24h (or q12hr if there is secondary meningitis)

-   Use cefepime 2g IV q8h instead of ceftriaxone if concern for
    Pseudomonas

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ID consult is strongly encouraged and they will guide duration

Diabetic Foot Infection -- VASP

Foundational Principles

-   Do NOT use antibiotics to treat uninfected wounds as patient harm
    outweighs benefit.

-   ALL wounds are colonized with microorganisms and superficial wound
    cultures should not be collected nor used to make treatment
    decisions.

-   Do NOT administer antibiotics to clinically stable patients until
    deep tissue or operative cultures are obtained.

-   Failure of oral antibiotics used for \< 48 hours is NOT a reason to
    use broad-spectrum antibiotics.

Evaluation

-   Plain radiograph for all pts; MRI w/contrast if abscess/osteo
    suspected

-   Use of inflammatory markers such as ESR or CRP at baseline may help
    determine level of inflammation with periodic trending (e.g. weekly)
    thereafter. Do NOT repeat these tests daily.

-   BCx (prior to antibiotics) if systemic signs of infection, or severe
    infection

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Do not culture superficial swabs of lesions, as these generally only
    grow colonizing organisms.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider obtaining MRSA nasal PCR. (ensure collected before nasal
    decolonization); \~90% negative predictive values for diabetic foot
    infections

-   Consult podiatry if osteomyelitis present for bone specimen culture
    and pathology (either from debridement specimen or bone biopsy)
    prior to starting antibiotics.

-   Consult surgery if concern for abscess, gas in tissue, joint
    involvement

-   Assess peripheral vasculature, consider arterial flow
    studies/vascular surgery consult

Management

-   Assess Severity:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mild: local infection, skin/subcutaneous tissue only, erythema \>0.5
    cm but ≤2cm from ulcer

-   Moderate: local infection w/erythema \> 2 cm from ulcer or deeper
    structures included without SIRS

-   Severe: local infection with systemic inflammation as evidenced by
    \>2 SIRS criteria

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider anti-pseudomonal coverage only if at risk for *Pseudomonas*
    infection (e.g. previous Pseudomonas on culture, water exposure;
    hospitalization within previous 90 days AND IV antibiotic use,
    immunocompromise).

-   Consider MRSA coverage with risk factors: previous MRSA on cultures,
    hospitalization within previous 90 days AND IV antibiotic use, IV
    drug use, hemodialysis

-   Consider anaerobic coverage with metronidazole

+---------+------------------------------+-----------------------------+
|         | > Non-purulent, no MRSA risk | > Purulent, MRSA risk       |
|         | > factors                    | > factors                   |
+=========+==============================+=============================+
| Mild    | Preferred:                   | 7-14 days                   |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | -   Cephalexin 500mg PO QID  |                             |
|         |     or 1g TID                |                             |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | -   Cefadroxil 1g PO BID     |                             |
|         |     (upon discharge only)    |                             |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | Alternative:                 |                             |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | -   Amoxicillin/clavulanate  |                             |
|         |     875/125mg PO BID         |                             |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | MRSA only with risk factors: |                             |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | -   Doxycycline 100mg PO BID |                             |
|         |     (add to ß-lactam)        |                             |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | T                            |                             |
|         | rimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole |                             |
|         | 5-8mg/kg/day                 |                             |
|         | (alone)---Preferred if       |                             |
|         | severe penicillin allergy    |                             |
+---------+------------------------------+-----------------------------+
| M       | Preferred:                   | 7 -- 21 days for soft       |
| oderate |                              | tissue infection only       |
|         | -   Ampicillin/sulbactam 3g  |                             |
|         |     IV Q6H                   | If osteomyelitis:           |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | -   Ceftriaxone 2g IV daily  | -   24-48 hours if complete |
|         |     ± PO metronidazole 500mg |     resection of infected   |
|         |     Q12H                     |     tissue                  |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | P. aeruginosa only with risk | -   1 -- 3 weeks if only    |
|         | factors (change to):         |     residual soft tissue    |
|         |                              |     infection               |
|         | -   Piperacillin/tazobactam  |                             |
|         |     3.375g IV Q8H ext        | 3 -- 6 weeks if residual    |
|         |     infusion                 | bone infection with         |
|         |                              | resection or 4 -- 6 weeks   |
|         | -   Cefepime 2g IV Q8H ±     | without resection           |
|         |     metronidazole 500mg PO   |                             |
|         |     Q12H                     |                             |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | -   Levofloxacin 750mg PO    |                             |
|         |     daily ± metronidazole    |                             |
|         |     500mg PO Q12H            |                             |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | MRSA only with risk factors  |                             |
|         | (add):                       |                             |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | -   Doxycycline 100mg PO BID |                             |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | -   T                        |                             |
|         | rimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole |                             |
|         |     5-8mg/kg/day for SSTI    |                             |
|         |     and 8-12mg/kg/day for    |                             |
|         |     osteomyelitis            |                             |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | -   Linezolid 600mg PO BID   |                             |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | Vancomycin (pharmacy         |                             |
|         | consult)                     |                             |
+---------+------------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Severe  | Preferred:                   | 7 -- 28 days for soft       |
|         |                              | tissue infection only       |
|         | -   Ceftriaxone 2g IV        |                             |
|         |     daily + metronidazole    | If osteomyelitis:           |
|         |     500mg PO Q12H PLUS       |                             |
|         |                              | -   48 hours if complete    |
|         | -   Vancomycin (pharmacy     |     resection of infected   |
|         |     consult), OR             |     tissue                  |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | -   Linezolid 600mg PO BID⁺  | -   7 -- 21 days if only    |
|         |                              |     residual soft tissue    |
|         | P. aeruginosa only with risk |     infection               |
|         | factors (change to):         |                             |
|         |                              | 21 -- 42 days if residual   |
|         | -   Piperacillin/tazobactam  | bone infection with         |
|         |     3.375g IV Q8H ext        | resection or 28 -- 42 days  |
|         |     infusion                 | without resection           |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | -   Cefepime 2g IV Q8H +     |                             |
|         |     metronidazole 500mg PO   |                             |
|         |     Q12H                     |                             |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | ⁺Linezolid is preferred for  |                             |
|         | use in necrotizing soft      |                             |
|         | tissue infections            |                             |
|         |                              |                             |
|         | Adjust regimen based on deep |                             |
|         | culture results              |                             |
+---------+------------------------------+-----------------------------+

Conversion to PO antibiotics (including osteomyelitis):

-   Active agent available

-   Functioning GI tract

-   Clinically stable

-   Select active agent(s) against recovered pathogen(s)

Additional Information

-   If pt HDS, hold abx until deep tissue/operative cultures obtained.

-   Most diabetic foot infections are polymicrobial in nature.

-   Culture results will help therapy, but all pathogens identified may
    not require treatment. Would discuss with ID if complex

Endocarditis -- Justin Smith

Background

-   Multiple etiologies of endocarditis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Typical Bacterial

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   S. aureus, Enterococcus spp (E. faecalis most commonly), viridans
    group streptococci, Strep gallolyticus (formerly S. bovis)

-   HACEK: Haemophilus, Aggregatibacter, Cardiobacterium, Eikenella,
    Kingella

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other infectious

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Culture negative: often recent antimicrobial exposure, slow growing
    organism

-   Coxiella, Brucella, Bartonella, Chlamydia, Legionella, Mycoplasma,
    Tropheryma whipplei, Cutibacterium acnes (formerly P. acnes)

-   Fungal: Candida and aspergillus most common

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-infectious: a.k.a., marantic endocarditis, Libman-Sacks
    Endocarditis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Rare, most common in advanced malignancy, SLE, inflammatory
    conditions

-   Higher risk for embolization compared to IE

-   Risk factors: IV drug use, congenital heart disease, valve
    abnormalities, intracardiac devices, recent cardiac surgery

Presentation

-   Fever (90%), murmur (85%), other: splenomegaly, splinter
    hemorrhages, Janeway lesions, Osler nodes, Roth spots

-   Persistent bacteremia despite appropriate treatment, new onset
    cardiac dysfunction, new onset valve abnormalities, stroke, other
    thromboembolic events, metastatic infections/abscesses, splenic
    abscess, septic pulmonary emboli

Duke Criteria:

-   Pathologic Criteria

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Microorganisms: culture or histology proven: vegetation, embolus, or
    intracardiac abscess

-   Pathologic vegetations: vegetation of abscess with histology proven
    endocarditis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Clinical Criteria

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Definite: 2 Major, 1 major and 3 minor, or 5 minor

-   Possible: 1 major and 1 minor, or 3 minor

-   Rejected: firm alternate diagnosis, resolution of evidence with \<4
    days of antibiotics, or absence of pathologic evidence with \<4days
    of antibiotics

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Major Criteria**           **Minor Criteria**
  ---------------------------- ------------------------------------------
  2x positive blood cultures   Predisposing heart condition/IDU
  from a typical organism      

  Evidence of endocardial      Fever
  involvement                  

                               Vascular phenomena (glomerulonephritis)

                               Immunologic phenomena (Osler nodes, Roth
                               spots, +rheumatoid factor, GN)

                               Micro (cultures that don't fit the above,
                               or serologic evidence of acute infection)
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Evaluation

-   Physical exam: murmur, decreased peripheral perfusion, evidence of
    heart failure, petechiae, splinter hemorrhages, Janeway
    lesions/Osler nodes, organomegaly

-   Blood cultures: at least three sets from different sites over a span
    of several hours

-   Echo (TTE vs TEE)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   It can be reasonable to start with TEE if pretest probability is
    high enough, if pt already has known valvular abnormalities, or TTE
    will be technically difficult

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   EKG: new heart block or prolonged PR raises concern for
    endocardial/perivalvular abscess. Endocarditis pts should be on
    telemetry, monitored closely by team.

-   CXR: infiltrates suggestive of septic pulmonary emboli, pulmonary
    edema, cardiomegaly

-   Imaging of distant affected site if concerned for septic emboli

-   Other advanced imaging in select scenario: cardiac CTA, cardiac MRI,
    FDG-PET/CT

Management

-   Empiric antibiotics:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If bacteria isolated from blood, reference bacteremia section for
    abx choice

-   If awaiting cultures

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Native valve: Vancomycin +/- GNR coverage (depending on clinical
    stability, risk factors, etc)

-   Prosthetic valve: Vancomycin and cefepime, consider gentamicin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Antibiotic Duration: determined by ID, often 4-6 weeks

-   Cardiac surgery consult: if valve dysfunction, perivalvular abscess,
    large (\>20mm) vegetations, heart block, ongoing embolization on
    abx, delayed Cx clearance (\>1 week on abx)

Additional Information:

-   Complications:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cardiac:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Heart failure: usually secondary to valve dysfunction. Most common
    when aortic valve involved, risk also depends on organism (worst is
    Staph aureus)

-   Perivalvular abscess: suspect when there are conduction
    abnormalities on EKG.

-   Pericarditis: can be suppurative or non-suppurative

-   Intracardiac Fistula

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Septic emboli and metastatic abscesses

-   Mycotic aneurysm: usually occurs at vessel branch points

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Follow Up

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Repeat TTE at completion of treatment to establish new baseline

-   Followed for valvular dysfunction with frequency determined by
    nature of the dysfunction

-   Regular dental care; prior IE is an indication for SBE prophylaxis
    with dental work.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Episode of IE is an indication for PDA or VSD closure

Fever in a Return Traveler- Madelaine Behrens

Background

-   Treatment of fever in a return traveler will depend on where the
    traveler came from and what risk their fever poses to themselves or
    others.

    Presentation

-   Is the pt sick? AMS, tachypneic, hypotensive

-   Do they have signs of severe disease? Cyanosis, meningism (nuchal
    rigidity, photophobia, headache), peritonitis, digital gangrene

-   History Pearls

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Obtain travel history: location(s), activities, purpose of travel,
    accommodations

-   Did they visit a friend or relative? (less likely to seek pretravel
    medical advice, higher risk for malaria, typhoid fever,
    tuberculosis, hepatitis A, and STD)

-   Were they hospitalized abroad? (consider MDR organisms)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Physical Exam Pearls

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Skin rash with or without conjunctivitis (i.e., measles,
    meningococcemia, hemorrhagic fevers such as Ebola)

-   Rapid respiratory rate (i.e., influenza, Middle East respiratory
    syndrome \[MERS\], pneumonic plague)

-   Persistent cough (i.e., TB, pertussis)

-   Decreased consciousness (i.e., meningococcal meningitis, rabies)

-   Bruising or unusual bleeding without previous injury (i.e.,
    hemorrhagic fevers)

-   Persistent voluminous diarrhea (i.e., cholera)

-   Persistent vomiting other than air or motion sickness (i.e.,
    norovirus)

-   Jaundice (i.e., hepatitis A)

-   Flaccid paralysis of recent onset (polio)

    Evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Are you suspicious for a possible high-risk infection? Isolate,
    report to health department as appropriate

-   Most common serious cause of fever is malaria falciparum: order
    thick and thin blood smears. If negative, repeat the test.

-   Viral hemorrhagic fevers such as Ebola, Crimean--Congo hemorrhagic
    fever, Marburg hemorrhagic fever, and Lassa fever are highly
    transmissible and require immediate treatment

-   Incubation periods:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \<21 days: East african trypanosomiasis, dengue, japanese
    encephalitis, leptospirosis, malaria, meningococcemia, nontyphoidal
    salmonellosis, plague, typhoid fever, typhus, viral hemorrhagic
    fevers, yellow fever

-   \>21 days: acute HIV, acute systemic shistosomiasis, amebic liver
    abscess, borreliosis (relapsing fever), brucellosis, leishmaniasis,
    malaria (esp after ineffective prophylaxis), rabies, TB, viral
    hepatitides, West african trypanosomiasis,

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fever pattern and course (not always helpful), notable exceptions
    include

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Relapsing fevers (fever spikes separated by days or weeks):
    borreliosis, malaria

-   48 hour interval fevers: plasmodium vivax or P ovale

-   72 hour fevers: Plasmodium malariae

-   intermittent, unsynchronized: P falciparum

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Initial labs: CBC, CMP, blood cx, rapid tests for malaria and
    dengue, PCR testing of plasma sample (for tick borne), CXR, blood
    smear (thick and thin), UA with microscopy and culture. Consider O
    &P, head imaging or LP, or additional abdominal imaging in the right
    clinical context.

-   Don't forget the common causes of fever (could have nothing to with
    pt's travel)

-   Look up current outbreaks to help guide clinical suspicion.
    <https://www.who.int/emergencies/disease-outbreak-news>

Fungal Infections -- Ally Glover

**\
**Evaluation

-   Bacterial BCx can detect candidemia but low sensitivity (50%).
    Fungal blood cultures also with low sensitivity.

-   Beta-d-glucan: note will not be elevated in mucormycosis,
    cryptococcosis, and blastomycosis.

-   Aspergillus galactomannan: BAL \> serum.

-   Pts with risk factors for candidemia (TPN, chronic line, GI disease,
    persistent neutropenic fever) with concerning clinical syndrome can
    be treated empirically with micafungin.

Candida Infections

Background

-   Part of normal flora of human GI and GU tract

-   Broad range of associated diseases from vaginal candidiasis to
    candidemia

-   Pts at highest risk of severe / invasive candida infection
    (candidemia):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Burn / surgical ICU pts

-   Solid organ recipients

-   Chemo pts / malignant heme pts

-   TPN dependent / central access pts (especially in ICU)

Presentation

-   Oropharyngeal: white plaques/patches in mouth +/- erythema, painful
    when eating

-   Esophageal: dysphagia/odynophagia, chest pain w/ swallowing

-   Vulvovaginitis: white, thick discharge; pruritus/erythema

-   Balanitis: white patches on penis with severe burning/itching

-   Mastitis: breast feeding pts with nipple injury

-   Invasive focal infections

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   UTI: ascending infection (can often be unilateral) vs. hematologic
    source (micro abscesses)

-   Peritonitis: often in peritoneal dialysis pts

-   Mediastinitis: often post thoracic surgery

-   Hepatosplenic: often in pts who just recovered from neutropenia in
    setting of heme malignancy

-   Candidemia: sepsis, often in setting of critical illness, think
    about when above risk factors present

Evaluation

-   Blood: candida is NEVER a contaminant in blood cultures

-   Urine: culture is standard method of identification but RARELY a
    urinary pathogen

Management

-   Candidemia / critical illness: start micafungin 100mg daily, consult
    ID

-   Vulvovaginitis: fluconazole 150mg x1 if mild, 150mg every 72 hrs for
    2-3 doses if severe

-   Oropharyngeal: nystatin oral suspension if mild thrush, if moderate
    -- severe candidiasis then fluconazole 100-200mg qday for 7-14 days

-   Esophageal candidiasis (AIDS defining illness): fluconazole
    200-400mg qday or micafungin 150mg daily for 14-21 days as an
    alternative agent

Additional information

-   Remember to check susceptibilities (C krusei has intrinsic azole
    resistance and C glabrata has high rates of fluconazole resistance)

Aspergillosis

Background

-   Most often in pts who have prolonged neutropenia, high dose
    steroids, or other immunosuppressive drug regimen or condition

-   Take thorough hx: farming, occupational exposure where pt might have
    inhaled conidia

Presentation

-   Classic pulmonary aspergillosis presentation: neutropenic pt with
    fever, pleuritic chest pain and hemoptysis

-   Tracheobronchitis: can occur in lung transplant pts

Evaluation

-   Aspergillus galactomannan Ag

-   Lung imaging if concerned for pulmonary aspergillosis

-   Differentiate possible vs probable vs proven (tissue) aspergillosis
    as it can reflect colonization without proper clinical syndrome or
    host

Management

-   Consult ID. Usually treat with voriconazole or other triazole
    (posaconazole, isavuconazole). Preferred over amphotericin based on
    clinical trials.

-   Fluconazole is NOT active against aspergillus

Blastomycosis

Background

-   Endemic in midwest, southeast, southern central US, and parts of
    Canada that border the Great Lakes

-   Mostly pulmonary manifestations, 25-40% of infections w/
    extrapulmonary involvement (skin, bone, GU, and CNS presentations)

Presentation

-   Pulmonary symptoms common: dyspnea, cough, fever, hemoptysis, chest
    pain

-   Verrucous lesions with irregular borders

-   Osteolytic bone lesions

-   Draining sinuses

Evaluation:

-   Serum and urine blastomycosis Ag

-   Antibody testing less useful in acute disease (interpret with
    caution)

Management

-   Pulmonary blastomycosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mild to Moderate: itraconazole 6-12 months

-   Moderate to Severe: ampho followed by itraconazole for 6-12 months

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Disseminated extrapulmonary blastomycosis: ampho followed by
    itraconazole for a year

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Note: in anyone who is immunosuppressed, especially pts with AIDS,
    start with amphotericin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CNS blastomycosis: 4-6 weeks of ampho followed by a year of
    itraconazole

Histoplasmosis

Background

-   The most common endemic mycosis in the US. Endemic to Ohio and
    Mississippi river valley.

-   Most infections are not clinically significant / do not require
    treatment.

-   At risk for disseminated disease (HIV, transplant recipients,
    immunocompromised, TNF- alpha inhibitors, elderly)

-   Differential diagnosis: TB, malignancy, sarcoidosis, other fungal
    infection

Presentation

-   Pulmonary histo: pna w/ mediastinal or hilar LND or masses,
    pulmonary nodules, cavitation

-   Disseminated histo: fever, mediastinal LND, diffuse pulm
    interstitial infiltrates, HSM, liver involvement, popular rash,
    cytopenias, mucosal lesions,  LDH, ferritin, adrenal involvement,
    colonic involvement.

Evaluation

-   Send BOTH Urine and Serum antigens. Requires attending name to
    order.

-   Antibody testing less useful in acute disease (interpret with
    caution)

-   Other diagnostics to consider: peripheral smear/buffy coat, fungal
    blood cultures, LDH, ferritin, BAL with cultures and cytology

-   Remember histo Ag has high cross reactivity with blasto Ag

Management:

-   Amphotericin and Itraconazole- discuss with ID, pharmacy about
    dosing, duration.

-   Pulmonary histo:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mediastinal granuloma, fibrosis, broncholithiasis: usually no tx.

-   Mild-moderate acute pulmonary histo: itraconazole if persistent
    symptoms \> 1mo

-   Chronic cavitations: itraconazole, likely 1 to 2 years

-   Severe acute pulmonary histo: amphotericin for 1-2 weeks +/-
    methylprednisolone followed by itraconazole for 12 weeks

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Disseminated histo:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mild-moderate disseminated disease: itraconazole for \~12 months

-   Severe disseminated disease: ampho for 1-2 weeks followed by
    itraconazole for \~12 mo

Additional information

-   Disseminated histoplasmosis can be associated with secondary HLH.
    Follow CBC closely.

-   If concerned for sarcoidosis, need to rule out histo prior to
    starting treatment for sarcoidosis

-   Urine antigen can be used to trend response to treatment

Genitourinary Infection -- VASP

Asymptomatic Bacteriuria

Background

-   Isolation of bacteria in an appropriately collected urine specimen
    from an individual without symptoms or signs of urinary tract
    infection. Bacteriuria, foul odor, urine appearance, pyuria, falls
    and/or confusion alone are not indicative of infection.

-   Oliguric ESRD pts may have bacteriuria from colonization due to lack
    of flushing of bladder; avoid sending UA/UCx unless pt is
    symptomatic

-   Treatment only required for specific populations:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pregnant women (screening performed at 12 -- 16 weeks)

-   Anticipated urologic intervention - when requesting, be sure to ask
    for Micro help in identifying potential pathogens needing treatment
    vs. likely contaminants

-   Some renal transplant recipients, depending on time since transplant

Complicated UTI and Pyelonephritis

See [UTI
algorithm](https://www.vumc.org/antimicrobial-stewardship-program/guidelines)
on VASP website

Background

-   Fever, pyuria, and costovertebral angle tenderness suggest
    pyelonephritis.

-   Consider it a complicated UTI if any of the following are present:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Renal calculi or other obstructive disease, immunosuppressed host,
    abnormal urological anatomy or physiology (including stents),
    presence of a urinary catheter

-   Male sex alone does NOT qualify as complicated

-   Sepsis or bacteremia

Evaluation

-   UA with reflex urine culture ONLY in patients with symptoms

-   If unable to obtain history, evaluate for objective signs of
    infection (fever, hypotension, tachycardia, leukocytosis, etc.) and
    evaluate for alternative explanations (O2 requirement suggest
    pneumonia, post-op fever within 48 hours, etc.)

-   BCx and UCx prior to abx

-   If there is no pyuria, consider an alternative diagnosis, or
    proximal ureteral obstruction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pyuria is common in the presence of a urinary catheter, kidney
    stones, urostomy, ileal conduit and other invasive devices, and may
    not indicate infection

Management

-   Antibiotic Duration: 7-14 days, depending on antibiotic choice

-   Tailor therapy once/if cultures are available. If no improvement in
    48h, consider imaging to rule out complications (e.g., perinephric
    abscess)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Transition from IV to PO should be considered for patients who meet
    the following criteria: able to tolerate enteral medications, signs
    of clinical improvement (defervesced, afebrile, down-trending WBC,
    etc.)

-   Days of IV therapy count towards overall treatment duration.

+---------+--------------------------+---------------------------------+
|         | > First Line             | > Alternative                   |
+=========+==========================+=================================+
| Outpt   | Amoxicillin-clavulanic   | Ciprofloxacin 500mg BID or      |
|         | acid 875-125mg BID x14   | levofloxacin 750 mg daily x 7   |
|         | days                     | days                            |
|         |                          |                                 |
|         |                          | TMP/SMX 1-2 DS BID x 7 days     |
+---------+--------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Inpt    | Ceftriaxone 2g q24h\     | Ertapenem 1g q24 instead of     |
|         | Cefepime 2g q8h          | Meropenem if no *Pseudomonas*   |
|         |                          |                                 |
|         | Pip/tazo 3.375g q8h ext  | Ciprofloxacin 750mg PO BID (500 |
|         | infusion                 | mg PO BID if bacteremia ruled   |
|         |                          | out) OR 400mg IV BID (if        |
|         | Meropenem 1g q8h (if h/o | susceptibility confirmed)\*     |
|         | or confirmed ESBL within |                                 |
|         | the last 90 days)        |                                 |
+---------+--------------------------+---------------------------------+

\*FQ's have same bioavailability if given PO or IV so oral is preferred

Uncomplicated Urinary Tract Infection (UTI)

Background

-   Clinical symptoms of UTI (dysuria/urgency/frequency/ hematuria) in
    non-pregnant, immunocompetent, neurologically intact pt with normal
    urologic anatomy and no indwelling urinary catheters

Management

-   Empiric therapy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Nitrofurantoin monohydrate: 100 mg PO BID x 5 days (avoid if any
    concern for pyelonephritis or if creatinine clearance \<30)

-   Cephalexin 250-500mg q6h x5-7 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Alternative therapies

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fosfomycin: 3 grams of powder mixed in water as a single PO dose
    (avoid if any concern for ascending UTI or pyelonephritis).
    Susceptibility test results must be requested, only possible for E.
    coli and E. Faecalis.

-   Amoxicillin-clavulanate: 875-125mg PO BID x5-7 days

-   Ciprofloxacin: 250mg PO BID x3 days

-   FQ's should be reserved for more serious infections than
    uncomplicated cystitis, and only after susceptibility results are
    confirmed given high rates of resistance

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Adverse effect profile \>\> beta-lactams (i.e. QT-prolongation,
    tendinopathies)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid amoxicillin, ampicillin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
    (TMP-SMX) due to increasing resistance unless culture data with
    confirmed susceptibility

Additional Information

-   MDR cystitis: ESBL isolates are increasingly common due to
    antibiotic overuse

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Before treating, decide if this is a TRUE UTI

-   If true, consider Fosfomycin (if E. coli) or nitrofurantoin (if
    susceptibility is confirmed -- K. pneumoniae and Enterobacter spp
    are usually resistant), gentamicin or tobramycin 5 mg/kg IV once
    (even in setting of AKI), or ID consultation

-   Ask the lab to check susceptibility results to these antibiotics for
    future reference

Catheter Associated Urinary Tract Infection (CAUTI)

Background

-   Culture growth of \> 10^3^ cfu/mL of uropathogenic bacteria + signs
    or symptoms consistent with infection (without another identified
    etiology) + indwelling urethral/suprapubic catheter or intermittent
    catheterization.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   This includes pts with catheters in place during the preceding 48
    hours

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Duration = greatest risk factor (increases 3-10% per day of
    catheterization)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other risks: female sex, diabetes, elderly, colonization of catheter
    bag, poor care

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bacteriuria, foul odor, pyuria, urine appearance falls and/or
    confusion alone are not indicative of infection in pts who are
    otherwise asymptomatic.

-   Ensure clean sample collected

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ideally, catheter is removed and midstream sample obtained

-   If catheterization required; removal of old catheter and sample
    taken from new catheter

Management

-   Distinguish uncomplicated vs complicated UTI (see above)

-   Antimicrobial management:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Guided by cultures and susceptibilities

-   Duration: 7 -- 14 days depending on abx, clinical response and
    whether infection constitutes complicated vs uncomplicated UTI

-   Special note regarding Candida UTI management: Candida is generally
    not pathogenic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presence in urine does not indicate infection (unless perinephric
    abscess, renal transplant, or complex fistulous disease)

-   Fluconazole achieves excellent urinary penetration while micafungin
    does not

-   If fluconazole-resistant Candida is cultured or suspected, consult
    ID

-   Susceptibilities are not routinely run-on Candida from urine
    cultures and would need to be requested if concern for true
    infection.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Catheter management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   At the least, catheters should be replaced at the time of antibiotic
    initiation (preferably removed).

-   If catheterization is necessary, intermittent catheterization is
    preferred over continuous use with pt educations on cleaning/hygiene
    prior to catheterization. Condom catheters and pure wicks also
    preferred over foley catheter.

GI Infections -- Lin Cao

Acute Diarrhea

Presentation

-   ≥3 BMs/day or abnormally loose stools

-   Vast majority of infectious diarrhea cases are acute with more
    persistent diarrhea, consider additional workup for noninfectious
    etiologies as well

-   Can be watery or inflammatory (bloody stools, signs of sepsis,
    severe abdominal pain)

-   History: food hx (particularly undercooked meats or unpasteurized
    dairy), occupational exposures, recent travel, pet and animal
    exposures, immunocompromised

    Evaluation

-   Exam: volume status, abdominal pain

-   Labs: CBC for leukocytosis/eosinophilia, BMP for electrolyte
    abnormalities, BCx if c/f systemic illness, consider GIPP or stool
    testing if severe illness or immunocompromise

    Management

-   Most cases are self-limited and resolve with just supportive care

-   Antimotility agents: bismuth subsalicylate, loperamide

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid antimotility agents with C. diff and inflammatory diarrhea

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid abx with Shigella and EHEC (can precipitate HUS), Salmonella
    (prolongs carrier time)

-   Antibiotics only indicated with severe illness or certain
    immunocompromised hosts:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cipro 500mg bid

-   Levofloxacin 500mg qd 3-5 days

-   Azithro 500mg qd 3 days

    C. Diff (see GI section)

Other GI Infections:

-   Less commonly infectious than acute diarrheal illnesses

    Whipple disease (*T. whipplei*):

-   Constellation of arthralgias (can be the first symptom to appear),
    weight loss, chronic intermittent diarrhea, abdominal pain

-   Dx: upper endoscopy with biopsy with PAS and PCR testing for *T.
    whipplei,* can sometimes also do testing from synovial fluid/lymph
    nodes/etc

-   Tx: CTX 2g IV daily or PCN 2 MU IV q4h x 2 wks followed by Bactrim 1
    DS tablet bid x 1 yr

    Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO):

-   Presents with bloating, abdominal discomfort, watery diarrhea

-   More commonly seen in pts with intestinal motility disorders,
    chronic pancreatitis, post-surgical changes
    (adhesions/strictures/blind loops)

-   Immunocompromised pts: consider CMV, MAC, TB, fungal etiologies,
    cryptosporidium

-   Tx: Rifaximin 1650mg qdaily for 14 days

    H. pylori (see GI section)

    Acute cholangitis (see GI section):

Viral Hepatitis (A-E):

-   Also consider HSV (especially in pregnancy), VZV, EBV, CMV though
    less common and usually seen more in immunocompromised pts

-   Evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   HAV, HBV, HCV IgG with PCR, HDV, HEV, EBV Qt, CMV Qt, HSV Qt, VZV
    IgM/IgG

-   LFTs: elevated AST/ALT (ALT\>AST generally) that often precedes
    elevation of bilirubin

-   Can present on a spectrum of severity ranging from elevated LFTs to
    acute liver failure; get hepatology involved early for evaluation
    and monitoring

    Hepatitis A

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presentation: self-limited, N/V, fever, malaise, abdominal pain,
    jaundice, dark urine

-   Transmission: Fecal oral transmission

-   Tx: supportive care, vaccine available

    Hepatitis B

-   Transmission: perinatal, sexual contact, parenteral

-   Acute:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presentation: Most pts have subclinical hepatitis but can present
    with serum sickness-like syndrome, anorexia, nausea, jaundice, RUQ
    pain, elevated LFTs

-   Tx: Generally supportive care unless severe illness, then generally
    treat with tenofovir/entecavir

-   HBV is less likely to become chronic than HCV

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Chronic:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presentation: Generally asymptomatic but can progress to cirrhosis
    and HCC

-   Extrahepatic manifestations 2/2 circulating immune complexes:
    polyarteritis nodosa, membranous nephropathy, aplastic anemia

-   Tx: entecavir/tenofovir, involve GI/ID, based on development of
    cirrhosis, ALT, HBV DNA level, immunosuppressed status.

-   Vaccine available

    Hepatitis C

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Transmission: parenteral, blood transfusion (prior to 1992), sexual,
    perinatal transmission

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   USPSTF recommends screening in all adults 18-79

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute Presentation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Generally asymptomatic but may have jaundice, nausea, dark urine,
    RUQ pain, elevated LFTs

-   Majority of hep C cases progress to chronic infection

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Chronic Presentation:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Nonspecific nausea, diarrhea, abdominal pain, anorexia, weakness but
    can progress to cirrhosis and HCC, LFTs not always elevated

-   Extrahepatic manifestations directly related to viral infection:
    essential mixed cryoglobulinemia, membranoproliferative
    glomerulonephritis, thyroiditis, porphyria cutanea tarda, lichen
    planus, etc.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tx: antivirals targeted to HCV genotype, however, there are
    pangenotypic regimens. Recheck viral load after 12 wks

    Hepatitis D

-   Requires HBV for infection, consider screening with HBV

    Hepatitis E

-   Presentation: self-limited acute infection with jaundice, malaise,
    anorexia, N/V, ab pain

-   Transmission: Fecal oral transmission

    Significantly higher mortality in pregnant individuals

HIV/AIDS and ART -- Kathryn Snyder and Quinton Taylor

Background

-   New HIV Diagnosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ID consult if pt is not on Rogers ID service (important for
    initiation, follow up \[CCC\], social work assistance)

-   ART is indicated for all HIV+ pts, regardless of CD4; however,
    starting ART requires appropriate outpt follow up

-   Lab evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   HIV viral load and genotype

-   T cell subsets (CD4 Count), CBC with differential, CMP, UA

-   HLA\*B5701 testing before using abacavir containing regimen

-   QuantiFERON Gold

-   Pregnancy testing

-   Viral hepatitis serologies

-   Toxoplasma serologies

-   CMP, CBC with differential, urinalysis

-   Other STI screening (Syphilis, Gonorrhea/Chlamydia)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Timing of ART initiation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Factors affecting timing of initiation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Drug toxicity and interactions, risks for resistance, adherence
    barriers

-   Treatment of opportunistic infections may delay initiation of ART
    given associated risk of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome
    (IRIS)

    -   Delay ART for several weeks after initiation of therapy for
        cryptococcal meningitis, tuberculosis, and CMV retinitis

    -   IRIS is a collection of inflammatory disorders associated with
        paradoxical worsening of preexisting infectious processes
        following the initiation of antiretroviral therapy (ART) in
        HIV-infected individuals. Symptoms are associated with
        underlying disease.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ART plan for overnight admits: okay to continue home ART, special
    consideration for:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pts with hepatic or renal dysfunction may need dose adjustment

-   Interactions with other newly initiated medications

-   If there is concern for non-adherence, can hold morning dose

-   Combination pills may need to be ordered as separate components

-   Close attention to medication reconciliation to ensure the pt's
    complete ART regimen is ordered

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Common key regimens for initiation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most regimens consist of an NRTI backbone (2 agents) plus a 3rd
    agent

-   Some dual therapy regimens (such as Dovato@) are non-inferior to
    standard 3-drug therapy

-   Many pts are started on combination pill regimens, including
    Integrase Inhibitor based regimens: Biktarvy®, Dovato®, Triumeq®,
    Genvoya®, dolutegravir + Descovy®

AIDS Defining Clinical Conditions -- Rebecca Choudhury

AIDS is defined by HIV infection with concurrent absolute CD4 count
\<200, CD4 percentage \<14%, or one of the following conditions
(predominately opportunistic infections and HIV associated
malignancies):

Neurologic/Ophthalmologic

CNS toxoplasmosis

-   Presentation: Variable, depending on disease burden/location, may
    include AMS, headache, seizure, ataxia, and focal neurologic
    deficits, +/- fever and flu-like symptoms

-   Evaluation: MRI w/ring-enhancing lesions on brain imaging, serum
    Toxoplasma IgG/IgM and (ideally) CSF Toxoplasma PCR (though CSF
    Toxoplasma PCR has a low sensitivity). Response to empiric therapy
    (\~90% will have radiographic improvement after 14 days) can also be
    diagnostic. Brain biopsy may be indicated if diagnostic uncertainty.

-   Management: Pyrimethamine, sulfadiazine, and leucovorin is the
    preferred regimen, discuss dosing with pharmacy. Alternative
    regimens: clindamycin + pyrimethamine + leucovorin, Bactrim,
    atovaquone + pyrimethamine + leucovorin

Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML)

-   Presentation: chronic (weeks to months), progressive neurologic
    dysfunction, particularly incoordination and other motor
    dysfunction, aphasia, sometimes cognitive impairment and personality
    changes

-   Evaluation: MRI brain w/patchy areas of demyelination in the
    subcortical white matter; location is variable, but parietal,
    occipital, and cerebellar involvement are common. JC virus PCR from
    CSF. Brain biopsy.

-   Management: Initiation of ART (there is no specific JC
    virus-directed therapy), IRIS may occur in which case clinical
    worsening before improvement may be seen. Fatal if HIV goes
    untreated.

HIV-related encephalopathy

-   Presentation: Similar to other progressive dementias, with short
    term memory loss followed by worsening global cognitive dysfunction,
    motor deficits, sometimes seizures in late stages

-   Evaluation: MRI w/diffuse cerebral atrophy and/or demyelinating
    lesions similar to PML. CSF w/elevated protein +/- lymphocytic
    pleocytosis, with no alternative cause. Send HIV RNA from the CSF,
    usually + in HIV encephalopathy

Cryptococcal meningitis

-   Presentation: Subacute to chronically worsening HA and fevers;
    meningismus and photophobia may be present but are often absent;
    rarely, focal neurologic deficits

-   Evaluation: LP to check opening pressure and can send serum and CSF
    Cryptococcus Ag, CSF culture. Brain imaging may be non-diagnostic

-   Treatment: Induction therapy with amphotericin and flucytosine x14
    days (at least), with repeat LP close to end of induction to confirm
    CSF inflammation is improving and culture is negative (note:
    Cryptococcus grows well on standard bacterial culture media).
    Following sterilization of CSF, consolidation therapy consists of
    high dose fluconazole for at least 8 weeks, followed by maintenance
    therapy with fluconazole for one year. Pts may require serial LP or
    VP shunt to manage ICP.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Delay ART for several weeks after start of treatment to avoid risk
    of IRIS.

CMV retinitis (with vision loss)

-   Presentation: Blurry vision, focal blind spots, visual field
    deficits, or scotomas and floaters. Typically begins unilateral,
    though often progresses to bilateral involvement.

-   Evaluation: Always consult ophtho if you suspect it! May cause
    complete retinal detachment. Check serum CMV PCR (or vitreous if
    able)

-   Management: IV ganciclovir or PO valgancyclovir (+intravitreous
    ganciclovir or foscarnet in severe disease). If not on ART, must
    delay ART for at least 2 weeks after start of CMV retinitis
    treatment to prevent immune recovery uveitis

Pulmonary

Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP)

-   Presentation: fever, shortness of breath, cough (usually
    non-productive), sometimes night sweats and weight loss. Hypoxia out
    of proportion to exam.

-   Evaluation: CT chest appearance usually bilateral and diffuse with
    GGOs and cystic lesions of varying size. Large cysts can rupture,
    causing pneumothorax.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Transbronchial biopsy, BAL, or induced sputum with cytology and GMS
    stain.

-   Sputum Pneumocystis PCR can be done, but this is a send-out with
    long turn-around-time

-   Consider serum LDH and 1,3-BD-glucan: should be elevated, but are
    nonspecific.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Management: Bactrim is the preferred treatment; PO is preferable as
    Bactrim is 100% bioavailable. Check ABG on ROOM AIR to consider of
    adding adjunctive steroids (If A-a gradient \>/=35 mmHg and/or PaO2
    \<70 mmHg). Alternative regimens may include primaquine +
    clindamycin or IV (NOT inhaled) pentamidine.

Pulmonary tuberculosis

-   Presentation: With low CD4, can have upper lobe cavities but also
    atypical radiographic pattern, including a normal-appearing CXR.
    Have a high degree of suspicion in any pt with advanced HIV and
    respiratory complaints.

-   Evaluation: TB skin tests and IGRAs have a high false negative rate
    in advanced HIV. At VUMC, any pt with HIV and respiratory complaints
    must be placed on airborne until TB ruleout- 3 sputum mycobacterial
    smears/cultures collected at least 8 hours apart (or 2
    smears/cultures with 1 GeneXpert) . If concentrated smear is
    negative x3, TB is unlikely (though have to follow up final culture
    to be sure).

-   Management: RIPE therapy is the standard initial treatment, with
    adjustment if needed for drug resistance or contraindications

Herpes simplex tracheobronchitis and/or pneumonitis/pneumonia

-   Evaluation: bronchoscopy with positive HSV PCR from BAL +/- lung
    biopsy. (Usually associated with HSV-1)

-   Management: agent and duration not well defined for bronchopulmonary
    disease; depending on severity of presentation, likely IV acyclovir
    to start followed by transition to PO antiviral once evidence of
    clinical improvement, for a total of 10-14 days.

Gastrointestinal

Esophageal candidiasis

-   Presentation: Dysphagia, odynophagia or both. Concurrent
    oropharyngeal candidiasis ("thrush') is common but not universal.

-   Evaluation: Typically presumptive. Treatment is the test; start
    fluconazole and consider EGD if symptoms do not improve after
    several days (in which case candidiasis may be severe, or it might
    not be the cause)

-   Management: Fluconazole; nystatin is ineffective, especially in the
    severely immunocompromised

Herpes simplex esophagitis

-   Evaluation: EGD shows diffuse ulcerations throughout the esophagus;
    in severe disease ulcers may coalesce into dark patches, "black
    esophagus." Esophageal biopsy is definitive, but can infer based on
    EGD appearance and serum studies.

-   Management: Similar to other mucocutaneous infections, consider IV
    acyclovir at first and transition to PO once clinically improved

CMV esophagitis/enteritis/colitis

-   Presentation: GI bleeding (colitis) or dysphagia and odynophagia
    (esophagitis)

-   Evaluation: serum CMV PCR, consult GI for consideration of
    EGD/colonoscopy

-   Management: (val)ganciclovir, foscarnet if ganciclovir resistance or
    contraindication

Chronic (\>1 mo) intestinal isosporiasis

-   Evaluation: Stool ova/parasite can capture Iospora belli (new name
    Cystoisospora belli), may need serial analysis due to intermittent
    shedding. Oocysts may also be seen on duodenal biopsy.

-   Management: Bactrim; pyrimethamine + leucovorin if Bactrim is
    contraindicated

Chronic intestinal cryptosporidiosis

-   Presentation: Diarrhea; may infect respiratory tract, causing
    nonproductive cough

-   Evaluation: on GiPP or Cryptosporidium Ag

-   Management: Early initiation or optimization of ART; Monotherapy
    with nitazoxanide is preferred; raising CD4 count \>100 is necessary
    to cure infection

Recurrent Salmonella septicemia

-   Generally sensitive to fluoroquinolones, but if not clinically
    improving as expected you can request sensitivities from the
    microbiology lab.

Neoplastic

Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma

-   DLBCL, Burkitt's, immunoblastic (subset of DLBCL), primary effusion
    lymphoma, and 1º CNS

Kaposi's sarcoma

-   Presentation: Distinctive mucocutaneous lesions, usually raised,
    papular, violaceous or darkly colored, non-tender and non-pruritic.
    Can also involve the visceral organs (esp lungs and GI tract) and
    deep lymphatic system.

-   Evaluation: clinical, tissue biopsy for staging, HHV-8 serum PCR.

-   Management: Limited mucocutaneous disease may resolve with
    initiation/optimization of ART, but widespread or resistant disease
    may require additional local therapies (eg: radiation) or systemic
    chemo

-   Bacillary angiomatosis (caused by Bartonella) may present similarly,
    but can be distinguished from KS on biopsy. It is neither a cancer
    nor an AIDS defining clinical condition, and is usually treated with
    doxycycline.

Cervical cancer

-   Presentation, diagnosis, and treatment are essentially the same as
    in HIV-negative pts, but incidence is higher and disease progression
    is often more rapid

Multisystem/Miscellaneous

Extrapulmonary or disseminated Mycobacterial infection (TB and non-TB)

-   TB can go everywhere; some notable extrapulmonary sites include
    lymph nodes (e.g., scrofula), bones and joints (e.g., Pott's disease
    of the spine), pleura and pericardium, GU tract, and CNS. Dx can
    come from tissue culture and sometimes MTB PCR for more rapid
    detection (needs ID approval).

-   TB-IRIS may be severe (esp with high infection burden) and hard to
    distinguish from TB treatment failure; can also be seen in
    adequately treated TB (provoked by the presence of dead bacteria)
    and undiagnosed latent TB.

-   Disseminated MAC is usually diagnosed with AFB blood culture (only 1
    positive needed). Think about it in pts with uncontrolled HIV and
    severe immunosuppression (esp CD4 \<50), with unintentional weight
    loss, chronic diarrhea and/or dyspnea, and evidence of GI
    malabsorption or with bone marrow suppression

Extrapulmonary or disseminated Histoplasmosis, Cryptococcocosis, and
Coccidiodomycosis

-   Can be difficult to distinguish based on clinical presentation and
    imaging alone. Diagnosed by culture and/or antigen testing depending
    on the organism and site of infection, and diagnosis may be
    supported by serologic studies.

-   Initial treatment of choice: liposomal amphotericin B in almost all
    cases

Chronic mucocutaneous HSV

-   Defined as mucocutaneous lesions present for \>1 month, can be
    present at any site

    Multicentric Castleman's Disease

-   See "Plasma Cell Dyscrasias" section in Hematology/Oncology for more
    details

Overview of Antiretroviral Therapy -- Kathryn Snyder and Quinton Taylor

+---------+------------+-----------------+----------------------------+
| **Fixed |            | **Renal         | **Specific                 |
| Dose    |            | Dosing**        | Considerations**           |
| Comb    |            |                 |                            |
| ination |            |                 |                            |
| reg     |            |                 |                            |
| imens** |            |                 |                            |
+---------+------------+-----------------+----------------------------+
| Bi      | Bi         | Discontinue if  | ↑ Metformin levels         |
| ktarvy® | ctegravir/ | CrCl \< 30; ok  |                            |
|         | Emtr       | w/HD            | Contraindicated with:      |
|         | icitabine/ |                 | rifampin, dofetilide,      |
|         | Tenofovir  |                 | rifabutin                  |
|         | (Al        |                 |                            |
|         | afenamide) |                 | Avoid close admin. with:   |
|         |            |                 | laxatives, sucralfate,     |
|         |            |                 | polyvalent cations (iron,  |
|         |            |                 | calcium, etc.)             |
+---------+------------+-----------------+----------------------------+
| Dovato® | Do         | CrCl 30-50:     | ↑ Metformin levels         |
|         | ltegravir/ | monitor for     |                            |
|         |            | hematologic     | Dose adjustment needed w/  |
|         | Lamivudine | toxicities with | rifampin use               |
|         |            | lamivudine      |                            |
|         |            |                 | Contraindicated            |
|         |            | CrCl\<30: do    | w/dofetilide and multiple  |
|         |            | not use combo   | antiepileptic drugs        |
|         |            | pill;           |                            |
|         |            | dose-adjust     | Avoid close admin. with    |
|         |            | individual      | polyvalent cations (iron,  |
|         |            | components      | calcium, etc.)             |
|         |            |                 |                            |
|         |            |                 | Test all pts for HBV prior |
|         |            |                 | to initiation              |
+---------+------------+-----------------+----------------------------+
| S       | Tenofavir  | Discontinue if  | Contraindicated            |
| ymtuza® | al         | CrCl\<30; ok    | w/rifampin, rifabutin,     |
|         | afenamide/ | w/HD but dose   | simvastatin, multiple      |
|         |            | after HD on     | antiepileptic drugs        |
|         | Emt        | dialysis days   |                            |
|         | ricitabin/ |                 | Note that cobicistat can   |
|         |            |                 | increase serum creatinine  |
|         | Darunavir/ |                 | without affecting          |
|         |            |                 | glomerular filtration so   |
|         | Cobistat   |                 | cautiously interpret serum |
|         |            |                 | creatinine levels          |
+---------+------------+-----------------+----------------------------+
| T       | Abacavir/  | CrCL 30-50:     | ↑ Metformin levels         |
| riumeq® | Dol        | monitor for     |                            |
|         | utegravir/ | hematologic     | Dose adjustment needed     |
|         | Lamivudine | toxicities with | with rifampin use          |
|         |            | lamivudine      |                            |
|         |            |                 | Contraindicated            |
|         |            | CrCl\< 30; do   | w/dofetilide and multiple  |
|         |            | not use combo   | antiepileptic drugs        |
|         |            | pill;           |                            |
|         |            | dose-adjust     | Avoid close admin. with    |
|         |            | individual      | polyvalent cations (iron,  |
|         |            | components      | calcium, etc.)             |
|         |            |                 |                            |
|         |            |                 | Test all pts for HBV prior |
|         |            |                 | to initiation              |
+---------+------------+-----------------+----------------------------+
| G       | Elv        | Discontinue if  | Many drug-drug             |
| envoya® | itegravir/ | CrCl \< 30; ok  | interactions due to CYP    |
|         | C          | w/HD            | 3A4 inhibition with        |
|         | obicistat/ |                 | cobicistat                 |
|         | Emt        |                 |                            |
|         | ricitabin/ |                 |                            |
|         |            |                 |                            |
|         | Tenofovir  |                 |                            |
|         | (Al        |                 |                            |
|         | afenamide) |                 |                            |
+---------+------------+-----------------+----------------------------+

+-----------+-------------+------------------+-----------+-----------+
| **N       | **Dose      | **Specific Side  | **Major   | **Special |
| ucleoside | adj**       | Effects**        | DDI**     | Points**  |
| RTI**     |             |                  |           |           |
+-----------+-------------+------------------+-----------+-----------+
| Abacavir  | Hepatic     | ↑ LDL/TG         | Tenofovir | Requires  |
| (ABC)     | dysfunction |                  |           | testing   |
|           |             | ↑ risk MI        |           | for HLA   |
|           |             |                  |           | B5701     |
+-----------+-------------+------------------+-----------+-----------+
| Emtr      | Renal       | Rash, insomnia,  | L         | Active    |
| icitabine |             | rhabdomyolysis,  | amivudine | against   |
|           |             | h                |           | HBV       |
| (FTC)     |             | yperpigmentation |           |           |
|           |             | in palms/soles   |           |           |
+-----------+-------------+------------------+-----------+-----------+
| L         | Renal       | Nausea, HA,      | Emtr      | Active    |
| amivudine |             | peripheral       | icitabine | against   |
|           |             | neuropathy,      |           | HBV       |
| (3TC)     |             | neutropenia,     |           |           |
|           |             | rash             |           |           |
+-----------+-------------+------------------+-----------+-----------+
| Tenofovir | Discontinue | ↑ lipids         | AED's may | Tx of     |
| Al        | if CrCl \<  |                  | ↑ levels  | choice    |
| afenamide | 15          |                  |           | for HBV   |
| (TAF)     |             |                  |           |           |
+-----------+-------------+------------------+-----------+-----------+
| Tenofovir | Renal       | N/V, ↑ LFTs,     | > \--     | Active    |
| D         |             | asymptomatic     |           | against   |
| isoproxil |             | ↑CK, renal       |           | HBV       |
| (TDF)     |             | dysfunction,     |           |           |
|           |             | bone mineral     |           |           |
|           |             | density loss     |           |           |
+-----------+-------------+------------------+-----------+-----------+

NRTI Additional Information

-   Tenofovir alone is indicated for HBV, in which case you should be
    mindful of renal clearance when dosing. In HIV, it is only used in
    combination with emtricitabine and third agent. Contraindicated if
    CrCl\<30

-   Class-wide side effect: Lactic acidosis, steatosis and lipoatrophy
    (though very rare with contemporary NRTIs)

-   Resistance: M184V confers high resistance to emtricitabine and
    lamivudine, mid-level resistance to abacavir, hypersusceptibility to
    tenofovir

+------------+---------+-------------+-----------+--------------------+
| *          | **Dose  | **Specific  | **Major   | **Special Points** |
| *Integrase | Adj.**  | Side        | DDI**     |                    |
| I          |         | Effects**   |           |                    |
| nhibitor** |         |             |           |                    |
+------------+---------+-------------+-----------+--------------------+
| R          | > \--   | > \--       | Rifampin, | > \--              |
| altegravir |         |             | AED's     |                    |
| (RAL)      |         |             |           |                    |
+------------+---------+-------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Do         | \*see   | Hy          | Rifampin, | Avoid close admin  |
| lutegravir | special | perglycemia | Efavirenz | with laxatives,    |
| (DTG)      | p       |             |           | sucralfate, iron,  |
|            | oints\* | Weight gain | ↑         | calcium            |
|            |         |             | Metformin |                    |
|            |         |             |           | May ↑Cr, without   |
|            |         |             |           | effect on renal    |
|            |         |             |           | function           |
+------------+---------+-------------+-----------+--------------------+

+----------+--------+----------------+---------------+---------------+
| **       | **H    | **Specific     | **Major DDI** | **Special     |
| NNRTIs** | epatic | Side Effects** |               | Points**      |
|          | Adj**  |                |               |               |
+----------+--------+----------------+---------------+---------------+
| E        | Stop   | Psychosis,     | Azoles,       | Give before   |
| favirenz | if     | vivid dreams,  | antifungals,  | meals;        |
|          | Child  | SI, mania,     | clopidogrel,  | discontinue   |
|          | Pugh   | seizures;      | some statins, | if rash       |
|          | B/C    |                | cl            | develops      |
|          |        | ↑ Lipids &     | arithromycin, |               |
|          |        | glucose        | Buprenorphine |               |
+----------+--------+----------------+---------------+---------------+
| Et       |        | Hy             | Clopidogrel,  |               |
| ravirine |        | persensitivity | c             |               |
| (ETR)    |        |                | larithromycin |               |
|          |        | ↑ Lipids &     |               |               |
|          |        | glucose        |               |               |
+----------+--------+----------------+---------------+---------------+
| Ne       | Stop   | Steven Johnson | Azoles,       | Don't start   |
| virapine | if     | Syndrome       | OCP's,        | if CD4 \>250  |
| (NVP)    | Child  |                | statins,      | in women, CD4 |
|          | Pugh   |                | c             | \>400 in men; |
|          | B/C    |                | larithromycin |               |
|          |        |                |               | Don't admin   |
|          |        |                |               | with antacids |
+----------+--------+----------------+---------------+---------------+
| Ril      |        | None           | AED's, PPI's, | Must be taken |
| pivirine |        |                | dexamethasone | with full     |
| (RPV)    |        |                |               | meal; Don't   |
|          |        |                |               | use if HIV    |
|          |        |                |               | RNA \>100k +  |
|          |        |                |               | CD4 \< 200;   |
|          |        |                |               |               |
|          |        |                |               | Don't admin   |
|          |        |                |               | with antacids |
+----------+--------+----------------+---------------+---------------+

NNRTI Additional Information

-   Class-wide side effect: hepatitis, rashes

-   Resistance: K103N resistance to efavirenz and nevirapine

+----------+---------+--------------------+----------------+---------+
| **       | **      | **Specific Side    | **Major DDI**  | **      |
| Protease | Hepatic | Effects**          |                | Special |
| inhi     | Dose    |                    |                | P       |
| bitors** | adj**   |                    |                | oints** |
+----------+---------+--------------------+----------------+---------+
| At       | Based   | Jaundice, Kidney   | CYP3A4         | Admin   |
| azanavir | on      | stones, AV block,  | Inhibitors     | with    |
| (ATV)    | Childs  | Pancreatitis,      |                | meals   |
|          | Pugh    | Rhabdomyolysis     | PPI and H2     |         |
|          |         |                    | blockers       |         |
+----------+---------+--------------------+----------------+---------+
| D        |         | Rashes             | CYP3A4         | Must    |
| arunavir |         |                    | Inhibitors     | stop if |
| (DRV)    |         | Pancreatitis       |                | rash    |
|          |         |                    | Azoles can be  |         |
|          |         |                    | used           |         |
|          |         |                    | cautiously     |         |
|          |         |                    | with drug      |         |
|          |         |                    | level          |         |
|          |         |                    | monitoring     |         |
+----------+---------+--------------------+----------------+---------+
| L        |         | AV block, QT       | CYP3A4         | Admin   |
| opinavir |         | changes            | Inhibitors     | with    |
| (LPV)    |         |                    |                | meals   |
|          |         | Pancreatitis       |                |         |
|          |         |                    |                |         |
|          |         | Hepatitis          |                |         |
+----------+---------+--------------------+----------------+---------+

Protease Inhibitor Additional Information

-   All protease inhibitors must be boosted:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ritonavir: can cause MSK pain, rhabdomyolysis, although not expected
    at usual doses

-   Cobicistat: may increase Cr without effect on renal function

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Class-wide side effects: hepatitis, hypersensitivity reactions,
    increased cholesterol/TG, hyperglycemia, GI upset, lipodystrophy

Antimicrobial Prophylaxis per CD4 Counts -- Rachael Pellegrino

+---------+-------------+--------------+---------------+--------------+
| CD4     | Op          | Indication   | Medication    | Special      |
| counts  | portunistic | for          |               | Notes        |
|         | Infection   | Prophylaxis  |               |              |
+=========+=============+==============+===============+==============+
| \<200   | P           | CD4 \< 200,  | TMP-SMX: 1 DS | If           |
| ce      | neumocystis | or CD4 \<    | daily (qd),   | intolerant   |
| lls/mm3 | Pneumonia   | 14%, may     | or TMP-SMX:   | of TMP-SMX:  |
|         | (PJP)       | consider     | 1SS qd        | dapsone\*,   |
|         |             | dis          | TMP-SMX: 1 DS | or inhaled   |
|         |             | continuation | TIW           | pentamidine, |
|         |             | if CD4       |               | or           |
|         |             | 100-200 in   |               | atovaquone   |
|         |             | setting of   |               |              |
|         |             | viral        |               |              |
|         |             | suppression  |               |              |
+---------+-------------+--------------+---------------+--------------+
| \<200   | Toxoplasma  | Toxoplasma   | TMP-SMX 1 DS  | Alternative  |
| ce      | gondii      | IgG + and    | tab daily     | regimens:    |
| lls/mm3 | e           | CD4 \< 100   |               | dapsone +    |
|         | ncephalitis |              |               | pyr          |
|         |             |              |               | amethamine + |
|         |             |              |               | leucovorin,  |
|         |             |              |               | or           |
|         |             |              |               | atovaquone   |
|         |             |              |               | (all         |
|         |             |              |               | regimens     |
|         |             |              |               | also         |
|         |             |              |               |              |
|         |             |              |               | effective    |
|         |             |              |               | for PJP )    |
+---------+-------------+--------------+---------------+--------------+
| \<50    | My          | Only if not  | Azithromycin  | NOT          |
| ce      | cobacterium | on fully     | 1200 mg       | indicated    |
| lls/mm3 | avium-      | suppressive  | weekly, or    | for those    |
|         | int         | ART and      | C             | initiating   |
|         | racellulare | active       | larithromycin | ART          |
|         | (MAC, MAI)  | disseminated | 500 mg BID,   |              |
|         |             | MAC is ruled | or Rifabutin  |              |
|         |             | out          | 300 mg daily  |              |
+---------+-------------+--------------+---------------+--------------+

-   

+---------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| > Infection   | > Screening           | > Prevention or Intervention |
|               | > Indication          |                              |
+===============+=======================+==============================+
| Hepatitis A   | Non-immune with ↑     | HAV vaccine series           |
| Virus (HAV)   | risk for HAV          |                              |
|               | infection (MSM, IVDU) |                              |
|               | or chronic liver      |                              |
|               | disease               |                              |
+---------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| Hepatitis B   | Pts without chronic   | HBV vaccine series           |
| Virus (HBV)   | HBV or non-immune     |                              |
+---------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| Human         | Age 13-45             | HPV vaccine series           |
| Papilloma     |                       |                              |
| virus (HPV)   |                       |                              |
+---------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| Influenza A   | All pts               | Yearly inactivated influenza |
| and B Virus   |                       | vaccine                      |
+---------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| Latent        | Pts with positive     | (INH 300mg + pyridoxine      |
| Mycobacterium | screening test for    | 25-50mg) PO daily for 9      |
| tuberculosis  | LTBI with no evidence | months                       |
| infection     | of active disease.    |                              |
| (LTBI)        |                       |                              |
|               | Pts with known        |                              |
|               | exposure              |                              |
+---------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| Streptococcus | All pts               | Pts without any previous     |
| pneumoniae    |                       | pneumococcal vaccines: Give  |
|               |                       | PCV15 or PCV20. If PCV15 is  |
|               |                       | used, also give PPSV23 in 1  |
|               |                       | year.                        |
|               |                       |                              |
|               |                       | Pts who have already         |
|               |                       | received PPSV23: Give PCV15  |
|               |                       | or PCV20 one year after most |
|               |                       | recent PPSV23 vaccine        |
|               |                       |                              |
|               |                       | Pts who have already         |
|               |                       | received PCV13: Give PPSV23  |
+---------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| Syphilis      | All sexually active   | Screening for syphilis and   |
|               | pts                   | gonorrhea/chlamydia with     |
|               |                       | treatment if indicated.      |
+---------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+
| Herpes zoster | Pts \> age 50         | Shingrix (recombinant        |
| (shingles)    |                       | zoster) vaccine series       |
+---------------+-----------------------+------------------------------+

Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome (IRIS) - Hannah Angle

Background:

-   An inflammatory syndrome characterized by the worsening of a
    pre-existing infection in patients with HIV after antiretroviral
    therapy (ART) initiation

-   Typically develops between 1 week to a couple months after starting
    ART

-   Patients with lower CD4 counts and higher viral loads who respond
    well to ART are at higher risk of IRIS

Evaluation:

-   IRIS is a clinical diagnosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presentation consistent with either a systemic or localized
    inflammatory response (specific clinical features dependent on
    underlying infection)

-   Most often seen in patients with significantly decreased CD4 counts
    who have a profound virologic and immunologic response to ART

-   Infections most associated with IRIS include CMV, PJP, HSV, HBV,
    HHV-8, Cryptococcus neoformans, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and
    Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC)

-   Need to rule out drug-resistant infection or nonadherence to
    antimicrobials, bacterial superinfection, or medication adverse
    effect

Management:

-   Prior to ART initiation, must evaluate for all opportunistic
    infections (OI), especially when an inflammatory response could
    cause swelling in an enclosed space (cryptococcal
    meningitis/encephalitis, tuberculous meningitis, CMV retinitis)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If these serious CNS infections are identified, initiation of ART is
    often delayed until OI is well-controlled with antimicrobials

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IRIS is usually a self-limited syndrome as long as infection is
    adequately treated

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Patients with IRIS should continue both ART and antimicrobial
    treatment for underlying OI

-   In severe cases, glucocorticoids can be used to decrease
    inflammation

Joint Infection and Osteomyelitis -- Ally Glover

**\
**Background:

-   If high concern for septic arthritis, engage Ortho before ID. Needs
    arthrocentesis +/- wash out.

-   ESR/CRP are helpful but nonspecific in diagnosing bone/joint
    infections

Presentation

-   Septic arthritis: erythema, effusion, limited ROM and pain with
    passive and active ROM

-   Osteomyelitis: often underlying a wound (diabetic foot ulcer, sacral
    decubitus ulcer) but may be hematogenous as well; probe to bone
    positivity is diagnostic for osteomyelitis

Evaluation

-   CBC (leukocytosis), ESR, CRP

-   Blood cultures

-   Imaging: start with X-ray \--\> if radiograph is negative for osteo,
    cannot rule out, need to get MRI. Very helpful if it's picked up on
    X-ray though due to specificity

-   Fluid studies & gram stain results from synovial fluid if concerned
    for septic arthritis: usually WBC \> 20,000 cells/ microL

Management

-   If pt is sick, don't wait for culture data to start empiric
    antibiotics

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gram positives: empiric coverage with vancomycin until ID and
    sensitivities; MRSA nares being negative does not rule out MRSA
    skin/soft tissue infection

-   Gram negatives: empiric coverage with ceftriaxone or cefepime if
    concerned for Pseudomonas.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If concern for septic arthritis, consult Ortho, hold AC

-   If a pt has a foot wound with underlying osteomyelitis, talk to
    Podiatry/Ortho for deep tissue biopsy. If clinically stable, hold
    abx.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IR and CT/US guided procedures don't really do bone biopsies, so
    talk to surgical specialty first

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Osteomyelitis abx duration: usually 6 weeks, but can do PO
    antibiotics based on susceptibilities, ID follow up

-   Septic arthritis abx duration: usually 3-4 weeks

Additional information:

-   Septic arthritis mimic: gout / CPPD \--\> obtain crystal analysis
    with synovial studies

-   Less common causes of septic arthritis: gonococcal, Lyme disease
    (order serologies if suspicion is high)

Odontogenic Infections -- Ashley Zeoli

Background

-   Consist primarily of dental caries and peridontal disease
    (gingivitis and periodontitis) that can have local and systemic
    involvement

-   Streptococcus species, peptostreptococcus, Veillonella, diptheroids
    \>80% of infections

    Presentation

-   Associated w/ fever of unknown origin (fever \> 3 weeks without
    etiology), bacteremia w/ seeding of heart valves and prosthetic
    devices

-   Periodontal abscess commonly encountered on wards

    Evaluation

-   Obtain panorex, use CT for osseous structures

-   If needing additional assistance, consult OMFS

    Management

-   Pyogenic odontogenic infections: parenteral therapy is favored

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Immunocompetent: unasyn 3g IV q6 hours (alternative is PCN G with
    metro)

-   Immunocompromised: zosyn 4.5g IV q6 OR cefepime 2g IV q12 + metro
    500mg PO q8

    Additional information

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Who needs antimicrobial ppx prior to dental procedures?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Does the pt have a high-risk condition or implanted device?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Yes? is the pt undergoing invasive dental procedure (manipulation of
    gingival tissue, periapical region of teeth, extraction, abscess
    drainage, routine teeth cleaning?)

-   Yes? Use antimicrobial ppx:: Amoxicillin 2g

    -   No? no abx ppx needed

Pulmonary Infections -- VASP, Evan Schwartz

Acute Bronchitis

Background

-   1-3 wks productive cough, often preceded by URI, may have
    wheezing/rhonchi

-   Distinct from chronic bronchitis (\>3 mos of consecutive cough x 2
    consecutive yrs)

-   Distinct from PNA (parenchymal consolidation, fever \>100.4F,
    hypoxia, tachypnea)

-   DDx: COVID-19, post-nasal drip, GERD, undertreated/new asthma, ACE-i
    induced bradykinin cough, undertreated CHF, acute PE, or new lung
    cancer

-   Typically a clinical dx; CXR/labs not necessary unless PNA suspected

Management

-   Supportive: lozenges, cough suppressants (guaifenesin or
    dextromethorphan), smoking cessation. Consider albuterol inhaler for
    wheezing

-   No indication for antibiotics

Community Acquired Pneumonia (CAP)

See [CAP
algorithm](https://www.vumc.org/antimicrobial-stewardship-program/guidelines)
on VASP website

Background

-   All PNA that does not otherwise meet criteria for Hospital Acquired
    Pneumonia (PNA that develops ≥48 hours after hospital admission),
    Ventilator Associated Pneumonia (PNA that develops ≥48-72 hours
    after endotracheal intubation), or aspiration PNA

-   Healthcare-associated pneumonia is no longer a clinical entity per
    2016 IDSA guidelines

-   MRSA Risk Factors:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Recent history of MRSA

-   Cavitary lesion or necrotizing pneumonia

-   Post-influenza bacterial PNA

-   Pts with IDU

-   Severe hypoxemia requiring intubation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pseudomonas Risk Factors:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Recent history of Pseudomonas

-   Bronchiectasis or structural lung disease

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Both MRSA and Pseudomonas Risk Factors:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hospitalization AND IV antibiotics in previous 90 days

-   Immunocompromising conditions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   *\**Double coverage for Pseudomonas is not indicated in general
    population; LVQ has 82% sensitivity so not recommended unless
    isolate proven susceptible

Evaluation

-   Sputum cultures prior to abx, consider BCx in select groups (severe
    pna, ICU admission, cavitary disease, immunosuppression).

-   Rule out flu if the right season, COVID-19, consider RVP if it will
    change management

-   CURB-65 or PSI can aid in decision between outpt vs inpt therapy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CURB65: Confusion, Uremia (BUN \>=19mg/dL), RR (\>30/min),
    BP(\<90/60), Age ≥ 65 If ≥ 2, hospitalization is recommended.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider urine pneumococcal Ag, urine Legionella Ag in severe CAP
    and in certain pts (e.g., neutropenia, asplenia, obstructive lung
    disease, hyponatremia, diarrhea, or heavy ETOH);

-   CRP, ESR, and pro-calc have not been shown to reliably improve
    outcomes; however, pro-calcitonin \< 0.25 suggests against bacterial
    respiratory infection and antibiotic discontinuation is encouraged

-   PA/ lateral CXR. If immunocompromised, consider CT chest w/o
    contrast (does not improve outcomes)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lobar Consolidation - likely bacterial

-   Interstitial Infiltrate - likely atypical vs. viral vs.
    non-infectious

-   Cavitation - concerning for fungal vs. necrotizing vs. mycobacterial

Management

-   Antibiotic Duration: 5-7 days (at least 5 days and improvement with
    clinical stability)

-   Outpatient management

-   Low Risk (no chronic heart, lung, liver, renal disease, DM,
    alcoholism, immunocompromise)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Amoxicillin 1g TID

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High Risk

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Amox/clav 875/125 mg BID

-   Cefuroxime 500 mg BID

-   Levofloxacin 750 mg daily

    Inpatient management

+----------------+----------------------+------------------------------+
|                | > Non-Severe/Non-ICU | > Severe/ICU                 |
+================+======================+==============================+
| No MRSA or     | Preferred:           | Preferred:                   |
| Pseudomonas    | Ampicillin-sulbactam | Ampicillin-sulbactam 3g IV   |
| Risk Factors   | 3g IV q6h OR         | q6h OR Ceftriaxone 2g IV     |
| (see above)    | Ceftriaxone 2g IV    | daily                        |
|                | daily                |                              |
| If cultures    |                      | \+ Azithromycin 500mg IV (or |
| are positive,  | High Risk Penicillin | PO) daily OR Doxycycline     |
| target         | AND Cephalosporin    | 100mg IV (or PO) q12h        |
| antibiotics to | Allergy:             |                              |
| the recovered  | Levofloxacin 750mg   | High Risk Penicillin AND     |
| pathogen.      | PO (or IV) daily     | Cephalosporin Allergy:       |
|                |                      | Levofloxacin 750mg IV (or    |
|                |                      | PO) daily                    |
|                |                      |                              |
|                |                      | Addition of steroids per ICU |
|                |                      | protocol                     |
|                |                      |                              |
|                |                      | If RPP and Legionella urine  |
|                |                      | antigen (if collected)       |
|                |                      | negative, atypical coverage  |
|                |                      | should be discontinued. If   |
|                |                      | RPP is positive for M.       |
|                |                      | pneumoniae or C. pneumoniae, |
|                |                      | doxycycline 100mg PO BID is  |
|                |                      | preferred. If high suspicion |
|                |                      | for Legionella or positive   |
|                |                      | urine antigen, azithromycin  |
|                |                      | or levofloxacin are          |
|                |                      | preferred over doxycycline.  |
+----------------+----------------------+------------------------------+
| MRSA or        | MRSA Options:        | MRSA: Vancomycin OR          |
| Pseudomonas    | Vancomycin (pharmacy | Linezolid                    |
| Risk Factors   | consult) OR          |                              |
| (see above)    | Linezolid 600mg PO   | > (if no bacteremia) PLUS    |
|                | (or IV) BID          |                              |
| \*If MRSA or   |                      | Pseudomonas: Cefepime 2g q8h |
| P. aeruginosa  | P. aeruginosa        | or Pip/tazo PLUS             |
| are not        | Options: Cefepime 2g |                              |
| recovered on   | IV q8h or            | Atypical: Azithromycin 500   |
| culture,       | Pip                  | mg IV (or PO) daily          |
| change to      | eracillin/tazobactam |                              |
| routine CAP    | 3.375g IV q8h        | Addition of steroids per ICU |
| coverage.      |                      | protocol                     |
|                |                      |                              |
| If cultures    |                      | If RPP and Legionella urine  |
| are positive,  |                      | antigen (if collected)       |
| target         |                      | negative, atypical coverage  |
| antibiotics to |                      | should be discontinued. If   |
| the recovered  |                      | RPP is positive for M.       |
| pathogen.      |                      | pneumoniae or C. pneumoniae, |
|                |                      | doxycycline 100mg PO BID is  |
|                |                      | preferred. If high suspicion |
|                |                      | for Legionella or positive   |
|                |                      | urine antigen, azithromycin  |
|                |                      | or levofloxacin are          |
|                |                      | preferred over doxycycline.  |
+----------------+----------------------+------------------------------+

[Anaerobic Coverage]{.underline}: Do NOT start metronidazole or
clindamycin for aspiration pneumonia. Anaerobic coverage should be
considered if empyema or lung abscess detected.

[Transition to PO]{.underline} as soon as patient able to tolerate PO
medications and is clinically improving. If patient has concurrent
bacteremia, transition after at least 3 days of IV antibiotics.

Additional Information

-   MRSA nasal swab has reported negative predictive value for MRSA
    pneumonia ranging 95% to \>99%; consider sending and if negative,
    discontinue MRSA agent

-   CTX is generally adequate coverage for aspiration PNA without
    evidence of abscess, empyema, or cavitary lesion on imaging

-   Aspiration pneumonitis does not require abx. Rapid resolution of
    leukocytosis and stabilization of vitals suggest aspiration
    pneumonitis.

-   There is low sensitivity of S. pneumoniae to azithromycin (42%) and
    doxycycline (72%), so these should not be used as monotherapy

-   Check for drug interactions with linezolid (e.g., SSRI, methadone,
    methamphetamine use)

Hospital Acquired Pneumonia (HAP) and Ventilator Associated Pneumonia
(VAP)

See [HAP/VAP
algorithm](https://www.vumc.org/antimicrobial-stewardship-program/guidelines)
on VASP website

Background

-   HAP: Pneumonia that develops \>48 hours after admission

-   VAP: Pneumonia that develops \>48 hours after endotracheal
    intubation

Evaluation

-   Cultures of blood, sputum, endotracheal aspirate and/or bronchoscopy
    specimen

-   Consider MRSA nares to help with de-escalation

-   If there is concern for respiratory viruses: send
    SARS-CoV-2/influenza/RSV (RPP may be considered for
    immunocompromised patients)

    Management

-   Initially cover for MRSA and *Pseudomonas*

-   Antibiotic Duration: 7 days in uncomplicated cases, although
    specific pathogens (e.g., *Pseudomonas*) may require longer duration
    and ID guidance

-   Consider ID consultation if the pt is not clinically improving on
    empiric therapy or if an MDR pathogen grows from culture

-   If no MRSA isolated and pt is improving, consider stopping
    vancomycin ASAP

-   There is concern for nephrotoxicity with combination Vancomycin and
    piperacillin-tazobactam, but data controversial

+----------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+
|          | > MRSA Coverage       | > Pseudomonas Coverage           |
+==========+=======================+==================================+
| Empiric  | Vancomycin (Pharmacy  | Cefepime 2g q8h OR               |
| Ant      | dosing) or linezolid  | Piperacillin-tazobactam 3.375    |
| ibiotics |                       | q8h extended infusion            |
+----------+-----------------------+----------------------------------+

Influenza

Background

-   Dx often clinical w/cough, sore throat, sputum/nasal discharge, HA,
    fever, myalgias, and malaise; ± N/V/D. Exam with increased flushing,
    rarely with lower respiratory symptoms.

Evaluation

-   During flu season: Obtain COVID/RPP or dedicated influenza PCR;
    testing is more accurate if obtained within 96 hour of symptom onset

-   CXR if concerned for bacterial superinfection

Management

-   Antivirals most effective when given \<48 hours from symptom onset;
    however, recommended to be given if symptomatic despite duration and
    to all hospitalized pts

-   Oseltamivir 75mg BID x 5 days, peramivir 600mg IV x 1 (needs renal
    adjustment), or baloxavir (age ≥12) 40mg once (use 80 mg if \>80kg)

-   Amantadine and rimantadine are no longer used due to emerging
    resistance

Inpatient COVID-19 Management -- Aisha Suara

Testing

-   Test patients with any new fever, cough, shortness of breath, loss
    of taste/smell, diarrhea/vomiting, or flu-like symptoms

-   Asymptomatic testing for SARS-COV-2 is no longer required for
    routine admissions or pre-procedures

-   Exceptions:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Admission to 10 CCT, 11N, MCE6, and MCE7

-   Pre-transplant pre-procedure planning

-   May also be required by post-acute care facility prior to discharge

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Would avoid retesting those with confirmed COVID-19 within the last
    30 days unless they develop symptoms or fall within the exceptions
    due to risk of lingering detection without contagiousness or
    recurrent infection

Evaluation of Admitted Patients with Symptomatic Acute COVID-19

-   Please refer to the hospital's current maximum oxygen requirement
    allowed on the floor to ensure patient is appropriately triaged

-   Basic admission workup for symptomatic, confirmed COVID-19

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Labs: CBC with diff, CMP, D-dimer, Ferritin, CRP, ESR, PT/INR, PTT,
    procalcitonin

-   Imaging: Portable CXR. Consider CTA PE if sudden or rapid worsening
    of hypoxia

-   Nursing: Strict I/O's to avoid pulmonary edema

-   Enhanced precautions (contact, airborne, eye protection)

Management

-   Fluid balance goal slightly net negative to even

-   Anticoagulation/DVT prophylaxis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Current guidelines suggest DVT ppx on admission

-   Would only initiate treatment dose anticoagulation if confirmed
    DVT/PE

Pharmacologic therapies

-   Note: Therapies, indications, and contraindications are frequently
    changing, please see latest VUMC/VA guidelines for specific
    indications for these medications or others. For VUMC, [RedCap
    form](https://redcap.vumc.org/surveys/?s=A9E7PXTCADJEA9P8) is
    required prior to ordering Paxlovid or Remdesivir

-   Nirmatrelvir/ritonavir (Paxlovid)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For use in symptomatic patients within 5 days of symptoms at high
    risk for progression to severe disease without significant drug
    interactions

-   Contraindications:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Risk of HIV resistance in patients with uncontrolled or undiagnosed
    HIV-1 infection

    -   [Substantial drug
        interactions](https://www.covid19-druginteractions.org/checker)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dosing:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   eGFR  60: nirmatrelvir 300 mg (two 150 mg tablets) + ritonavir 100
    mg (one 100mg tablet) BID x 5 days

-   eGFR 30 to \<60 mL/min: nirmatrelvir 150 mg (one 150 mg tablet) +
    ritonavir 100 mg (one 100 mg tablet) BID x 5 days

-   eGFR \<30 mL/min: use is not recommended

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Significant drug interactions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Remdesivir

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For use in patients hospitalized with COVID within 7 days of
    symptoms at high risk for progression to severe disease

-   Contraindications: known hypersensitivity, ALT \>/= 10x ULN, on
    mechanical ventilation or ECMO

-   Dosing:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mild to moderate COVID-19 who may be admitted for other indications
    but are at high risk of progression to severe COVID 19: loading dose
    200mg IV x1 then 100mg IV q24h x 2 days. Course can be extending for
    a total of 5 days if patient progresses to severe COVID-19
    (requiring supplemental oxygen)

-   Severe COVID-19 requiring supplemental oxygen: loading dose 200mg IV
    x1 then 100mg daily x 4 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Monitoring: baseline CBC, INR, q48h CMP

-   Do not need to remain in the hospital to complete course of
    Remdesivir

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dexamethasone

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For inpatient management of COVID-19 who require supplemental
    respiratory support (NC, non-invasive ventilation, mechanical
    ventilation, or ECMO)

-   Dosing

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   6mg PO/IV x 10 days; consideration of longer taper if no clinical
    improvement or persistently elevated CRP

-   12mg Po/IV daily can be considered in those requiring \>=10L who are
    clinically worsening despite 6 mg and who are not eligible for
    baricitinib or tocilizumab

    -   Contraindications: no hard contraindications, use clinical
        judgement if concomitant serious bacterial/fungal infection

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Baricitinib (JAK inhibitor)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Eligibility determined by ID and/or Pulm/Crit

-   Use in those requiring \>=6L or \>40% FiO2, \<=7 days since
    admission to the hospital, and/or clinical worsening despite
    steroids and supportive care

-   Contraindications: hypersensitivity, concurrent treatment with
    tocilizumab, dialysis, ESRD, or acute anuric kidney injury, ALT\>=
    10x ULN, active TB or systemic fungal infection, or pregnancy

-   Dosing:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Would discuss with pharmacist if patient is taking an OAT3
    inhibitor, otherwise dosing is based on eGFR

-   For patients with eGFR \> 60 ml/min: baricitinib 4 mg po daily

-   For patients with eGFR 30-59 ml/min, baricitinib 2 mg po daily

    -   For patients with eGFR 15-29 ml/min, baricitinib 1 mg po daily

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   To be administered for 14 days or until hospital discharge

-   Monitoring: CBC w/ diff and CMP at baseline

-   Adverse events: thrombosis, elevated LFTs, severe infection 2/2
    lymphopenia and neutropenia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tocilizumab (IL-6 inhibitor)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Eligibility determined by ID and/or Pulm/Crit

-   Adjunctive therapy for those who are not eligible with baricitinib

-   Contraindications: hypersensitivity, recent hx of diverticulitis,
    history of bowel perforation, demyelinating disorders, ALT\>= 5x
    ULN, ANC \<500, Plt \<50k, active bacterial, fungal, or viral
    infection other with COVID-19

-   DOSING: 8mg/kg, up to max of 800mg IV, once

-   Adverse events: Bowel perforation, elevated lipids, elevated LFTs,
    serious infections

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Antibiotics:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider CAP coverage if evidence of PNA on imaging or lack of
    improvement despite supportive care

-   Can also use procalcitonin to guide decision though procal may be
    elevated in severe COVID-19 infection without concomitant bacterial
    infection

Discharge Recommendations

-   Typical discharge criteria for respiratory illness requiring
    supplemental oxygen

-   If patient was hospitalized FOR COVID-19, Patients should
    self-isolate x 20 days after the test was obtained AND until
    improving and fever-free x 24 hours

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If hospitalized WITH COVID-19 (i.e hospitalized for other
    indications and required remdesivir and/or steroids), would isolate
    for 10 days after test was obtained

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider telehealth PCP f/u

-   May be seen in-person at clinic after they have completed the
    required isolation

-   Consider a referral to home health

Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Adults (MIS-A)

-   Consider in those with fever with unclear etiology, history of
    previous COVID-19 diagnosis 2-8 weeks prior, and laboratory evidence
    of organ dysfunction

-   See [VUMC COVID-19 Guidance for
    MIS-A](https://www.vumc.org/coronavirus/sites/default/files/COVID%20Documents/MIS-A%20Guidance%20for%20VUMC%20COVID-19%20Guidelines.pdf)
    for full diagnostic criteria

-   Treatment: IVIG, steroids, and DVT ppx

Mycobacterium Tuberculosis (MTB) and Non-tubercular mycobacterium (NTM)
-- Ally Glover

Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB)

-   Micro profile: small, aerobic, acid-fast bacillus

-   Epidemiology overview: 8,331 reported TB cases in US in 2022
    per CDC. Up to 13 million people living in the US with latent TB.

-   Terminology: some discrepancies / evolution of language around TB

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Active tuberculosis (now often called Tuberculosis Disease)

-   Latent TB Infection (now often called Tuberculosis Infection)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Transmission: inhalation of aerosolized droplets from an infected
    individual

-   Possible outcomes of this exposure/transmission:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Immediate clearance by host defenses

-   Primary TB Disease

-   TB infection (Latent Disease)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presentations

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TB Disease (Active TB)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Primary TB (after first exposure)

    -   Fever, cough, pleuritic chest pain

    -   CXR: hilar/mediastinal LAD, pulmonary consolidation, pleural
        effusion. Some patients can present with isolated pulmonary
        cavitations.

-   Reactivation (post primary TB, years after exposure often)

    -   Presents more insidiously: fever, cough, malaise, weight loss,
        dyspnea. There is an overlap with primary TB.

    -   CXR: usually involves apical and posterior upper lobe
        consolidations, often with cavitations

-   Extrapulmonary manifestations: lymphadenitis, pericarditis (can
    cause tamponade), genitourinary (can cause infertility even in
    women), peritoneal involvement, and CNS involvement

    -   Disseminated TB

        -   Also referred to as miliary TB. Can range from acute to
            chronic in presentation.

        -   Dissemination is more often seen in immunocompromised hosts
            (including patients with HIV/AIDS).

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TB Infection (Latent Disease)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Asymptomatic by definition

-   The immune system has contained any active disease such that
    individuals are not infectious

-   CXR may show old, healed tuberculosis but patient has no history of
    treatment. This patient would be very high risk for reactivation.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Testing & Diagnosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Who to test?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Clinical judgement is key

-   In general, think about patients about to go on TNF-alpha blocker or
    a similar biologic, patients with malignancies, patients with newly
    diagnosed or undiagnosed HIV, patients at high risk due to living
    conditions (unhoused individuals in shelters, incarcerated
    patients).

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tuberculin skin test (TST) and interferon gamma release assay (IGRA)
    are often used for screening purposes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If someone had the BCG vaccine, cannot use TST

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If you are concerned for symptomatic TB disease, need to get 2 AFB
    sputum samples with Xpert testing before can come off TB precautions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Xpert MTB/RIF detects the MTB rproB gene. Also detects rifampin
    resistance.

    -   98% sensitive for a single sputum specimen in smear-positive
        culture-positive cases; approximately 70% sensitive for smear
        negative culture-positive cases (this increases to 90% if you
        test 3 samples).

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Treatment:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TB Infection (Latent TB):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Different options:

    -   Rifampin (RIF) daily for 4 months (4R)

    -   Isoniazid (INH) and RIF daily for 3 months (3HR)

    -   INH and rifapentine (RPT) weekly for 3 months (3HP)

    -   INH for 6-9 months (alternative if contraindication to
        rifamycins)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TB Disease:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Multi drug regimen for at least 6 months for pulmonary TB

    -   INH, RIF, pyrazinamide (PZA), and ethambutol (EMB) for 2 months
        followed by INH and RIF for 4 more months

-   For CNS involvement: 12 months of therapy plus steroids

-   For bone and joint involvement: 6-9 months of therapy

-   For certain patients with drug-susceptible TB confined to pulmonary
    system: new recommendation that can do a 4-month course where
    rifapentine (RPT) and moxifloxacin (MOX)

    -   2 months of RPT, INH, PZA, and MOX, followed by 9-weeks of RPT,
        INH, and MOX

-   If patient has HIV, remember that TB meningitis is one of the
    infections most likely to result in IRIS, so ART initiation is held
    in this case

-   These treatment summaries are for non-pregnant patients

Non tubercular mycobacterium (NTM)

-   These are mycobacteria species that do not cause tuberculosis or
    leprosy

-   Ubiquitous in the environment

-   Most well-known species: mycobacterium avium complex (MAC)

-   NTM manifestations in patients:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pulmonary disease

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pulmonary MAC

    -   Presents usually with cough, weight loss, fatigue

    -   Often occurs in patients with underlying lung disease
        (bronchiectasis, COPD) or patients with prior TB

    -   Another common phenotype: women \> 50 who are nonsmokers

        -   More likely to have CFTR mutations

    ```{=html}
    <!-- -->
    ```
    -   Common imaging findings: nodules, bronchiectasis, and/or
        cavities

    -   Diagnosis: symptoms, imaging findings, 2 positive sputum samples
        with NTM growth or 1+ bronchial washing (if patient symptomatic)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Disseminated infections

    -   Most often seen with HIV/AIDS

    -   Disseminated MAC presents usually with fever, night sweats,
        weight loss

        -   End organ involvement: bone marrow (manifesting as cell line
            derangements), adenopathy/hepatosplenomegaly, GI
            (manifesting as diarrhea, abdominal pain), and pulmonary

        -   Diagnosis: AFB blood cultures, culture & staining/path from
            end organ areas of involvement (i.e. bone marrow biopsy)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NTM infections can also present as superficial lymphadenitis or skin
    infections

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Depends on macrolide susceptibility

-   For pulmonary MAC: 3 drug regimen consisting of a macrolide (usually
    azithromycin), a rifamycin (usually rifampin), and ethambutol.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Aminoglycoside also sometimes used depending on type of pulmonary
    disease

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Duration of treatment is usually 15-18 months. Depends on how
    quickly patients can clear their cultures as you need treatment
    until 2 consecutive sputum cultures are negative for at least 12
    months

-   Disseminated disease treatment is more complicated and is affected
    by ART often in patients with HIV, so reach out to ID

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ART should be started in individuals with new HIV diagnosis as soon
    as MAC treatment is started (unless another co-infection prevents
    this due to risk of IRIS)

Sexually Transmitted Infections -- Lauren Waskowicz

Evaluation: Gonorrhea, Chlamydia, Trichomonas

-   Microbial diagnosis is preferred, rather than clinical diagnosis
    alone

-   Test of choice: NAAT of the first-catch urine in men; NAAT of
    vaginal swab in women

-   NAAT of pharyngeal or rectal swab should also be performed in
    patients with reported symptoms and recent sexual exposure. Note
    this is also routine testing in patients on PrEP.

-   Routine screening should be offered to sexually active patients, as
    many are asymptomatic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Women age \< 25 years should undergo annual screening for G/C

-   MSW without HIV infection should undergo screening for G/C if at
    increased risk

-   MSM without HIV infection should undergo annual screening for G/C

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NAATs can detect both LGV and non-LGV chlamydia, but cannot
    distinguish between them

-   ALWAYS Check CDC guidelines to confirm treatment strategy given
    emerging resistance:
    [[https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-guidelines/default.htm]{.underline}](https://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment-guidelines/default.htm)

Chlamydia

Background

-   Cause: gram negative bacteria *Chlamydia trachomatis*

-   Most individuals are asymptomatic though spectrum of dx: urethritis,
    cervicitis PID, conjunctivitis, perihepatitis (Fitz-Hugh-Curtis
    syndrome), pneumonia, proctitis, epididymitis, reactive arthritis,
    pharyngitis, lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV), endemic trachoma

-   Differential diagnosis: Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Trichomonas
    vaginalis, Mycoplasma genitalium

Management:

-   Doxycycline 100mg BID x 7 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Alternative treatment options (for allergies/severe
    contraindications): azithromycin (1g PO x 1), levofloxacin (500mg PO
    daily x7 days), and ofloxacin (300mg BID PO x7 days)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pts who have receptive anal intercourse with positive rectal
    chlamydia NAAT should receive empiric LGV therapy with doxycycline
    100mg BID for 21 days rather than 7.

-   Pts with recent potential or confirmed exposure within the last 1-2
    weeks should be treated empirically

-   Pts with persistent symptoms, confirmed infection, and who already
    underwent appropriate treatment, likely have a re-infection, rather
    than treatment failure. Test again.

-   Empiric therapy for gonorrhea should be given to pts unless NAAT is
    negative

-   Instruct patient to abstain from sexual contact until treatment
    course completed, test of cure not generally warranted

-   Partners should undergo screening and treatment. Expedited partner
    therapy (giving pt script for their partner(s)) IS legal in TN and
    can be used when the partner is unlikely to seek medical care.

Gonorrhea

Background

-   Gram-negative coccus *Neisseria gonorrhoeae*

-   Spectrum of disease: urethritis, cervicitis, epididymitis,
    proctitis, pharyngeal infections, conjunctivitis, PID, and
    disseminated gonococcal infection

Management

-   CTX is the only current abx that meets the strict treatment efficacy
    goals with single-dose therapy.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High dose IM ceftriaxone (\<150kg 500mg IM; \>150mg 1g IM)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Same for pharyngitis or conjunctivitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CTX allergies: Azithromycin (2g PO x1) + Gentamicin (240mg IM x1) or
    Gemifloxacin. Would discuss with ID.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Treatment of chlamydia must also be accompanied with gonorrhea
    treatment when it has not been excluded with molecular testing.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Doxycycline 100mg BID for 7 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pts who have persistent symptoms despite tx should be suspected of
    having resistant gonorrhea or *Mycoplasma genitalium*. Test with
    culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing (with or without
    NAAT).

-   Partners should undergo screening and treatment. Expedited Partner
    Therapy is NOT legal for gonorrhea treatment in TN.

-   Instruct patient to abstain from sexual contact for 7 days following
    treatment, test of cure not generally warranted

Trichomonas

Background

-   Flagellated protozoan *Trichomonas vaginalis*

-   Most individuals are asymptomatic, although there is a spectrum of
    disease: urethritis or cystitis, vaginitis, cervicitis, pelvic
    inflammatory disease

-   Most common non-viral sexually transmitted infection worldwide

Management

-   Female: Metronidazole 500 mg BID for 7 days

-   Male: Single dose of 2g of Metronidazole (Four 500 mg tablets)

-   Due to high rates of co-infection with other STI's patients should
    undergo a full screening panel if Trichomonas is confirmed

-   Partners should undergo screening and treatment. Expedited Partner
    Therapy is NOT legal for Trichomonas treatment in TN.

-   Instruct patient to abstain from sexual contact until they and their
    sexual partner have completed treatment and are asymptomatic. Women
    should undergo retesting within 3 weeks to 3 months to ensure cure

Syphilis

Background

-   Caused by the spirochete, *Treponema pallidum*

-   High rate of HIV co-infection among MSM with syphilis (\~42%)

-   Transmitted by direct contact with an infectious lesion during sex
    (condoms do NOT provide full protection)

-   Can readily cross the placenta

Evaluation

-   Test all pts with signs and symptoms, as well as pts who are at
    increased risk for acquiring infection (pts with sexual partner with
    early syphilis, MSM, HIV, high risk sexual behaviors, and history of
    commercial sex work or incarceration)

-   HIV testing should be offered to all pts who test positive

-   Pregnant pts should be screened for syphilis

-   There are two types of serologic tests: treponemal-specific tests
    (FTA-ABS, MHA-TP, TPPA, TP-EIA, CIA) and nontreponemal tests (RPR,
    VDRL, TRUST). VUMC utilizes Reverse Sequence Algorithm due to high
    number of false negatives in traditional algorithm (see diagram
    below for testing strategy)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Treponemal tests typically remain positive for life following
    infection

-   Nontreponemal quantifies amount of antibody present and can be used
    to detect titers to assess for treatment. Titers should decline
    after a pt has been treated. A rise in titers (4 fold) in a
    previously treated pt should be concerning for new infection.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Requires a humoral response, so can be false negatives if
    immunocompromised

-   False positives: autoimmune diseases, pregnancy, other infections

-   Neurosyphilis can occur at any time after infection. All newly
    diagnosed pts with syphilis should have a full neurologic exam and
    if any abnormalities should have an LP sent for CSF-VDRL (specific,
    but not as sensitive) with reflex to FTA-ABS (sensitive, but not as
    specific)

-   Any pts with syphilis and vision changes should get an ophthalmology
    evaluation for fundoscopic exam.

> ![Diagram, letter Description automatically
> generated](media/image26.png){width="3.0902777777777777in"
> height="1.5392639982502188in"}

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
                          +Treponemal             -Treponemal             
  ----------------------- ----------------------- ----------------------- --
  +Non-treponemal         Diagnostic of syphilis  Likely false positive   
                          (completely new or                              
                          potentially                                     
                          re-infected)                                    

  -Non-treponemal         Likely history of       Likely not syphilis or  
                          successfully treated    false negative (due to  
                          syphilis                prozone effect\*)       

  \*Prozone effect: when                                                  
  there is an                                                             
  overabundance of                                                        
  antibodies and they                                                     
  interfere with                                                          
  clumping/formation of                                                   
  antigen/antibody                                                        
  complex so                                                              
  agglutination cannot be                                                 
  visualized                                                              
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

Management

-   When positive Treponemal Ab + low positive or negative RPR, it is
    important to determine prior testing and treatment.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For obtaining historical syphilis titers and past treatment records,
    email syphilis.history@tn.gov with responses to be expected same day
    or next business day

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   To assess treatment efficacy, goal of a fourfold decrease in titer
    after treatment

+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
|                 | Symptoms        | Treatment       | Treatment       |
|                 |                 |                 | Alternatives    |
+=================+=================+=================+=================+
| Primary         | Painless (but   | PCN G           | Doxycycline     |
|                 | can be painful) | benzathine 2.4  | 100mg PO BID x  |
|                 | chancre at      | million units   | 14 days         |
|                 | inoculation     | IM x1           |                 |
|                 | site with       |                 | OR              |
|                 | regional        |                 |                 |
|                 | lymphadenopathy |                 | Ceftriaxone     |
|                 |                 |                 | 1-2g daily IM   |
|                 |                 |                 | or IV x 10-14   |
|                 |                 |                 | days            |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 |                 |                 | OR              |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 |                 |                 | Tetracycline    |
|                 |                 |                 | 500mg PO QID x  |
|                 |                 |                 | 14 days         |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 |                 |                 | OR              |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 |                 |                 | Amoxicillin 3g  |
|                 |                 |                 | BID and         |
|                 |                 |                 | probenecid      |
|                 |                 |                 | 500mg BID x 14  |
|                 |                 |                 | days            |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Secondary       | Systemic        |                 |                 |
|                 | illness with    |                 |                 |
|                 | rash (palms,    |                 |                 |
|                 | soles), fever,  |                 |                 |
|                 | malaise,        |                 |                 |
|                 | alopecia,       |                 |                 |
|                 | hepatitis,      |                 |                 |
|                 | mucous patches, |                 |                 |
|                 | condyloma,      |                 |                 |
|                 | pharyngitis     |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Early Latent    | Infected, but   |                 |                 |
|                 | no symptoms.    |                 |                 |
|                 | Occurs within   |                 |                 |
|                 | one year of     |                 |                 |
|                 | initial         |                 |                 |
|                 | infection.      |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Tertiary        | Symptomatic     | PCN G           | Doxycycline     |
|                 | late syphilis   | benzathine 2.4  | 100mg PO BID x  |
|                 | (CV system,     | million units   | 4 weeks         |
|                 | gummatous dx)   | IM weekly x3    |                 |
|                 |                 | weeks           | OR              |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 |                 |                 | Ceftriaxone 2g  |
|                 |                 |                 | daily IM or IV  |
|                 |                 |                 | x 10-14 days    |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Late Latent\    | Infected, but   |                 |                 |
| \               | no symptoms.    |                 |                 |
| Syphilis of     | Occurs \>1 year |                 |                 |
| Unknown         | after initial   |                 |                 |
| Duration        | infection.      |                 |                 |
|                 | Refer to last   |                 |                 |
|                 | known negative  |                 |                 |
|                 | test.           |                 |                 |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | Date of         |                 |                 |
|                 | infection       |                 |                 |
|                 | unknown         |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| Neurosyphilis   | Can occur at    | Aqueous PCN G 4 | PCN G procaine  |
|                 | any time.       | million units   | 2.4 million     |
|                 |                 | IV q4h x 10-14  | units IM daily  |
|                 | Early:          | days            | and probenecid  |
|                 | asymptomatic or |                 | 500mg PO QID x  |
|                 | symptomatic     |                 | 10-14 days      |
|                 | meningitis,     |                 |                 |
|                 | vision loss,    |                 | If PCN          |
|                 | hearing loss    |                 | allergic,       |
|                 |                 |                 | desensitize     |
|                 | Late: brain and |                 |                 |
|                 | spinal cord     |                 | Ceftriaxone 2g  |
|                 | manifestations  |                 | daily IM or IV  |
|                 | (dementia,      |                 | x 10-14 days    |
|                 | tabes dorsalis) |                 |                 |
|                 |                 |                 |                 |
|                 | Treat ocular    |                 |                 |
|                 | syphilis like   |                 |                 |
|                 | neurosyphilis   |                 |                 |
+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

Skin and Soft Tissue Infection (SSTI) -- VASP

Cellulitis

See [SSTI
algorithm](https://www.vumc.org/antimicrobial-stewardship-program/guidelines)
on VASP website

Background

-   DDx: erysipelas, pyomyositis, necrotizing fasciitis, osteomyelitis,
    venous stasis, shingles, gout

-   Pathogens: Streptococcus species: Group A (most common), B, C, G,
    Staphylococcus aureus (including MSSA and MRSA)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-purulent, lymphangitis, or erysipelas? Think Streptococcus

-   Purulence (abscess or boil)? Think Staphylococcus

-   Strep anginosus is a strep species that can cause pus formation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Unique clinical scenarios and associated organisms/organisms to
    consider:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dog/cat bite: Pasteurella multicoda, Capnocytophaga canimorsus

-   Human bite: Eikenella corrodens, oral anaerobes, S. aureus

-   Fresh water exposure: Aeromonas hydropholia, Plesiomonas
    shigelloides

-   Salt water exposure: Vibrio vulnificus

-   Neutropenia, presence of ecthyma: Gram negatives (Pseudomonas
    aeruginosa)

-   Immunocompromised: Fungal (Candida spp, Cryptococcus), Nocardia,
    non-tubercular mycobacteria)

-   Burn pts: Pseudomonas, Acinetobacter, Fusarium

Evaluation

-   Outline border of erythema and obtain urgent surgery consultation if
    rapid spread of infection, crepitus, air in tissues, or pain out of
    proportion to exam

-   Blood cultures (BCx): ONLY needed if systemic signs of infection or
    immunocompromised (most pts will not need BCx or imaging)

-   US for underlying abscess

-   CT/MRI w/contrast: if necrotizing fasciitis, pyomyositis or
    osteomyelitis suspected

-   Bilateral lower extremity cellulitis is RARE and warrants
    consideration of non-infectious etiologies

-   Elevation test: if erythema improves after elevating leg above the
    level of the heart for 1-2 minutes, less likely to be infectious
    cellulitis

Management

-   Abx for 5 days for uncomplicated; can extend to 10-14 days if little
    to no improvement, more extensive/serious infection, or if
    immunosuppressed

-   Typically improvement is not seen until \>48 hours of antibiotics,
    usually longer

-   Provide anti-*Staphylococcal* antibiotics for purulent cellulitis in
    addition to I&D, if abscess present

-   Clinical appearance may often appear to worsen initially despite
    adequate therapy

-   Always elevate the extremity for more rapid clinical improvement!

+-----------------+-------------------+---------------+--------------+
|                 | > [No Staph       | >             | > [          |
|                 | >                 | [MSSA]{.mark} | MRSA]{.mark} |
|                 | suspected]{.mark} |               |              |
+=================+===================+===============+==============+
| [Mild/M         | [Cephalexin 500   | [Cephalexin   | [TMP/SMX 1-2 |
| oderate]{.mark} | QID]{.mark}       | 500           | DS tabs      |
|                 |                   | QID]{.mark}   | BID]{.mark}  |
| [               | [Amoxicillin 500  |               |              |
| (Outpt)]{.mark} | TID]{.mark}       | [Cefadroxil   | [Doxycycline |
|                 |                   | 1g            | 100 mg       |
|                 | [Cefadroxil 1g    | BID]{.mark}   | BID]{.mark}  |
|                 | BID]{.mark}       |               |              |
|                 |                   | [             |              |
|                 |                   | Dicloxacillin |              |
|                 |                   | 500           |              |
|                 |                   | QID]{.mark}   |              |
|                 |                   |               |              |
|                 |                   | [             |              |
|                 |                   | \*Clindamycin |              |
|                 |                   | 300-450 mg    |              |
|                 |                   | q6h]{.mark}   |              |
+-----------------+-------------------+---------------+--------------+
| Severe (Inpt)   | Cefazolin 2g q8h  | Cefazolin 2g  | Vancomycin   |
|                 |                   | q8h           | (dose per    |
|                 | CTX 2g q24h       |               | PK)          |
|                 |                   | PO step down: |              |
|                 |                   | cephalexin    | PO step      |
|                 |                   | 500 mg q6h or | down:        |
|                 |                   | 1000mg q8h    |              |
|                 |                   |               | TMP/SMX 1-2  |
|                 |                   |               | DS tabs BID  |
|                 |                   |               |              |
|                 |                   |               | Doxycycline  |
|                 |                   |               | 100 mg BID   |
|                 |                   |               |              |
|                 |                   |               | Linezolid    |
|                 |                   |               | 600 mg BID   |
+-----------------+-------------------+---------------+--------------+
|                 |                   | Stepdown to   |              |
|                 |                   | above PO      |              |
|                 |                   | options once: |              |
|                 |                   |               |              |
|                 |                   | -   *Staph    |              |
|                 |                   |     aureus*   |              |
|                 |                   |               |              |
|                 |                   |    bacteremia |              |
|                 |                   |     is ruled  |              |
|                 |                   |     out       |              |
|                 |                   |               |              |
|                 |                   | -   Clinical  |              |
|                 |                   |     stability |              |
|                 |                   |     obtained  |              |
|                 |                   |     \> 24     |              |
|                 |                   |     hours     |              |
|                 |                   |               |              |
|                 |                   | -   Patient   |              |
|                 |                   |     is        |              |
|                 |                   |               |              |
|                 |                   |    tolerating |              |
|                 |                   |     oral      |              |
|                 |                   |     therapy   |              |
+-----------------+-------------------+---------------+--------------+
| \*Consider for  |                   |               |              |
| PCN allergy;    |                   |               |              |
| check           |                   |               |              |
| antibiogram     |                   |               |              |
| (VUMC vs VA)    |                   |               |              |
| for Staph       |                   |               |              |
| sensitivities;  |                   |               |              |
| clindamycin     |                   |               |              |
| should NOT be   |                   |               |              |
| used for strep  |                   |               |              |
| coverage        |                   |               |              |
+-----------------+-------------------+---------------+--------------+

Necrotizing Fasciitis

Background

-   Infection of the deeper soft tissues that causes necrosis along the
    muscle fascia and overlying subcutaneous fat that is rapidly
    progressive and lethal if not addressed

-   Clinical cues include rapid spread, pain out of proportion to exam,
    crepitus and hemorrhagic bullae

-   LRINEC score used to screen for necrotizing soft tissue infection

Evaluation/Management

-   SURGICAL EMERGENCY!

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   STAT consult to surgical service for emergent debridement (generally
    EGS vs ortho)

-   Imaging does NOT rule out necrotizing fasciitis and should not delay
    these consultations

-   CT is the best imaging modality

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ID consult

-   Empiric antibiotics

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Preferred: linezolid 600 mg IV BID + piperacillin-tazobactam 3.375g
    IV q8h extended infusion

-   For severe penicillin allergy: linezolid 600 mg IV BID + cefepime 2g
    IV q8h + metronidazole 500 mg IV BID

-   For severe penicillin and cephalosporin allergy: linezolid 600 mg IV
    BID + levofloxacin 750 mg IV q24h + metronidazole 500 mg IV BID

-   If patient cannot receive linezolid due to allergies, or multiple
    serotonergic drug interactions: vancomycin + piperacillin-tazobactam
    3.375g IV q8h extended infusion + clindamycin 900mg IV q8h

Nephrology

Editors: Emily Walsh MD & Rochelle Prokupets MD

Reviewed by Ed Gould, MD and JP Arroyo, MD, PhD

Acute Kidney Injury (AKI) -- Piera Sosa, Terra Swanson

Background:

-   Definition based on 2012 KDIGO Guidelines: 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Rise in serum creatinine (sCr)  0.3 mg/dL within 48 h, or increase
     1.5x baseline in 7d

-   Urine volume \<0.5 mL/Kg/H for 6 hours

    Stages of AKI:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Based on 2012 KDIGO Guidelines:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
                          Serum Creatinine        Urine Output
  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------
  Stage 1                 Increase of  0.3 mg/dl \< 0.5 ml/kg/h for \> 6
                          (≥26.5 μmol/L) or 1.5 - hours
                          1.9x baseline           

  Stage 2                 2.0 - 2.9x baseline     \< 0.5 ml/kg/h for \>
                                                  12 hours

  Stage 3                  3.0x baseline, or     \< 0.3 ml/kg/h for 24
                          increase in serum       hours or anuria for 12
                          creatinine to 4.0      hours
                          mg/dl, or initiation of 
                          RRT                     
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

-   Patients should be staged based on criteria that gives them highest
    stage (sCr v UOP)

-   Note, risk of need for RRT and risk of death increases with
    increased stage

  Framework for AKI: 

-   Pre-renal/hemodynamic AKI:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Volume depletion: GI loss, hemorrhage, burns, critical illness
    🡪increased insensible losses 

-   Decreased effective circulating volume: cardiorenal, hepatorenal,
    hemodynamic effects of ACEi/ARB 

-   Afferent arteriole constriction: NSAIDs, iodinated contrast 

-   Renal vein thrombus 

-   Note, when prerenal AKI is prolonged it can lead to intrinsic kidney
    injury, i.e. ATN

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Intra-renal: glomerular, tubular, or interstitial diseases

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ATN = Most common form of intrinsic AKI. Can be ischemic or toxic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Toxins: endogenous (e.g. rhabdo) and exogenous (e.g. drugs)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute interstitial nephritis (AIN): usually drug induced (i.e.
    NSAIDs, PPIs, beta lactam abx), though can also be secondary to
    autoimmune disorders (i.e. SLE, Sjögren's)

-   Infection associated -- e.g., staphylococcal infections (especially
    in diabetics), streptococcal infections, legionella)

-   Glomerulonephritis

-   Other causes:  

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Crystalline nephropathy: IV acyclovir, tumor lysis, ethylene glycol 

-   Small vessel disease: MAHA, TTP, HUS

-   Large vessel disease: Aortic dissection (leading to renal
    infarction), renal artery aneurysm or other renal artery
    abnormality. Note, these would suggest bilateral renal involvement
    or patient with only one functioning kidney 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Post-renal: can occur at any level of the GU system 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ureteral: stones, external compression (malignancy, LAD, abscess) 

-   Bladder: neurogenic bladder, malignancy, obstructing blood clot 

-   Urethra: BPH, prostate cancer, prostatitis  

-   In rare instances, retroperitoneal fibrosis

-   Note, when postrenal AKI is prolonged/untreated it can lead to
    irreversible intrinsic kidney disease

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pre-renal azotemia and acute tubular necrosis comprise the majority
    of inpatient AKI

Evaluation 

-   History (carefully evaluate all medications taken + contrast
    exposure) and volume exam

-   Labs: CMP, urinalysis, urine protein/Cr ratio

-   500cc-1L IV fluid challenge: If sCr improves to baseline in \<48H
    then the insult was likely pre-renal. If not, then look for other
    etiologies

-   Evaluate for obstruction: I/O cath, foley, post void residual \>250
    cc

-   Renal ultrasound: usually to evaluate for post renal or renal
    vascular etiologies and not warranted unless any of the following-

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   No obvious cause of AKI is identified

-   Abrupt oliguria or anuria (think renal vein thrombus or obstruction)

-   High suspicion for bladder outlet obstruction (PVRs might give you
    same data) 

-   Note, add doppler to evaluate for renal artery stenosis (or if
    working up resistant hypertension) 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Urine electrolytes 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   FENa \<1% or FEUrea \<35% (if on diuretics) suggest pre-renal
    physiology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Caveat, only validated in oliguric patients and more difficult to
    interpret after fluids, diuretics, etc

-   Not needed in the initial work-up of all patients with AKI. If high
    suspicion for pre-renal etiology, trial fluid challenge and assess
    response first

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Urine sodium can be used to assess Na avidity: UNa \> 40 suggests
    ATN and UNa \< 20 suggests pre-renal.

-   Urine osmolality can be used as a surrogate marker for Na/volume
    avidity. If UOsm\>SOsm = water retention. Role in AKI in clinical
    trials still unclear.

Management

-   All causes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Minimize fluctuations in blood pressure

-   Consider holding anti-hypertensive medications, especially ACEi/ARB
    (remember to determine plan to resume at/after discharge). Note that
    this hold reflects the uncertainty of hypovolemia as a contributor
    to AKI, NOT nephrotoxicity.

-   Avoid unnecessary nephrotoxins

-   Dose-adjust medications for changing renal function

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pre-renal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   True volume depletion: IV volume expansion

-   Cardiorenal syndrome: decongestion/diuresis

-   Hepatorenal syndrome: see Hepatology section for more information

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Post-renal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Relieve obstruction based on etiology: I/O cath vs foley. Consider
    involving urology/IR if procedureal intervention is warranted (i.e.
    urostomy, percutaneous nephrostomy)

-   Monitor for post-obstructive diuresis (see below)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Intra-renal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ATN: Supportive care (for rhabdo, see below). Monitor for post-ATN
    diuresis. If delayed recovery, may need outpatient dialysis

-   Glomerulonephritis: consult AKI service for assistance with biopsy
    and selecting immunosuppressive agents if needed

-   AIN: review meds, consult nephrology for possible biopsy and
    recommendations for steroids

-   Infection associated: treat the infection

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Monitor for renal recovery 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Suspect concomitant ATN if sCr decreases with volume expansion,
    diuresis, or relief of obstruction but remains a few points above
    baseline

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   When to consult Nephrology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Urgent indication for dialysis (see "Renal Replacement Therapy")

-   Abrupt anuria

-   Cr worsening or urine output inadequate without clear cause

-   Need for kidney biopsy (i.e nephrotic syndrome, RPGN)

Additional information 

-   Rhabdomyolysis: UA positive for blood but no RBCs on microscopy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Toxic damage due to myoglobin

-   Serologic markers of muscle injury: elevated CK, AST\>ALT with
    normal ALK Phos 

-   Fluids adjusted to urine output goal of 200-300 mL/hr until CK
    declines (monitor for volume overload while on fluids)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider isotonic bicarb for initial 1-2L of IVF-\> urine
    alkalinization reduces precipitation

-   Avoid calcium repletion for hypocalcemia unless symptomatic 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Post-obstructive diuresis 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Necessary process to clear accumulated uremic toxins

-   Replace \~50% of urine output to prevent pre-renal azotemia

-   Monitor calcium, phosphorus, and magnesium in severe
    post-obstructive diuresis

Contrast Induced AKI (CI-AKI) -- Trey Richardson

Background

-   When someone develops an AKI do your due diligence and evaluate for
    the usual causes of AKI, regardless of when they were given contrast

-   Mechanism of injury: direct toxic effect leading to tubular necrosis
    and arteriolar vasoconstriction leading to medullary ischemia

KDIGO Criteria for CI-AKI:

-   sCr increase by 0.5mg/dl or 25% increase in sCr from baseline 48
    hours after radiologic procedure where intravenous contrast was
    administered

Who is at risk for CI-AKI?

-   Normal kidney function: incidence of CI-AKI is 1-3%

-   Pre-existing CKD: Incidence of CI-AKI may be as high as 20% in
    patients with CKD 4-5

-   Other risk factors include diabetes, heart failure, and advanced age

-   No real sCr or eGFR threshold below which iodinated contrast is
    contraindicated, especially in patients for whom imaging will alter
    management (e.g. acute stroke, PE, STEMI). Decision should consider
    risks and benefits.

Risk reduction strategies

-   Volume expansion with isotonic crystalloid (PRESERVE Trial) in
    patients with AKI or eGFR \<30 ml/min/1.73m\^2 who are clinically
    hypo- or euvolemic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   1cc/kg/hr for 6-12 hours before/during and 6-12 hours after the
    procedure in patients at high risk for CI-AKI. This rate can be
    decreased based on the risk for hypervolemia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If the patient is volume overloaded, likely shouldn't receive IVF
    prior to a contrasted study

-   Never delay a necessary procedure out of concern for worsening renal
    function. If in doubt, talk to Nephrology

Iodinated contrast in CKD-5/ESRD patients

-   Iodinated contrast does not need to be dialyzed immediately

-   Avoid giving if you are trying to preserve residual kidney function
    in ESRD on PD

Gadolinium contrast for MRI

-   Historically contraindicated in any AKI or if GFR \<30 in CKD given
    risk of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis, but there have been some
    recent changes in guidelines (NKF and ASN) and many providers are
    allowing its use in CKD patients so if any concern, discuss with
    nephrology.

Approach to Chronic Kidney Disease -- Terra Swanson

Definition of CKD

-   Decreased kidney function or one or more markers of kidney damage
    for 3 or more months

-   History of kidney transplant

-   GFR \< 60. Staging helps risk-stratify pts likely to progress or
    develop complications of CKD

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CKD IIIa: eGFR 45-60

-   CKD IIIb: eGFR 30-44

-   CKD IV: eGFR 15-30

-   CKD V: eGFR \< 15

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Markers of kidney damage

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Urine Albumin/Cr ratio

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mild: 0-30 mg/g

-   Moderate: 30-300 mg/g

-   Severe: \>300 mg/g

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Urine sediment: RBC casts, WBC casts, oval fat bodies or fatty
    casts, granular casts

-   Electrolyte derangements

-   Abnormalities on histology

-   Structural abnormalities: cysts, hydronephrosis, scarring, masses,
    renal artery stenosis

When to refer to Nephrology Clinic

-   eGFR \< 45

-   Persistent urine albumin/creatinine ratio \> 300 mg/g

-   Urine protein/creatinine ratio greater than 500 mg/g

-   Rapid loss of kidney function (\> 30% decline over 4 months)

-   Hematuria not secondary urologic condition or if there are RBC casts
    on UA

-   Inability to identify presumed cause of renal dysfunction

-   Difficult to manage complications: hyperkalemia, anemia,
    bone-mineral disease, HTN

-   Confirmed or presumed hereditary kidney disease (PCKD suspected)

Complications of CKD

Imbalance of water homeostasis

-   As renal mass declines, the ability to both concentrate and dilute
    the urine is impaired

-   This manifests as hyponatremia (no end-organ to respond to ADH) and
    edema

-   Treat this with water restriction, diuretics or, eventually,
    ultrafiltration

Metabolic acidosis

-   In small studies, correcting serum bicarbonate to a goal of 22-30
    meq/L slows decline in renal function and protects against
    bone-mineral complications of chronic metabolic acidosis

-   Can calculate bicarbonate deficit to estimate dose of bicarbonate

-   If bicarb \< 22, consider:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sodium bicarb 650 mg TID (8mEq bicarb per 650mg tablet) up to
    5850mg/day (70 mEq or 3 tabs TID)

-   Sodium citrate (Bicitra): 1mL = 1 mEq \* Careful in cirrhosis since
    citrate cannot be metabolized

-   Baking soda (sodium bicarbonate): 1 teaspoon = 59 mEq HCO3 (careful
    of Na load)

HTN in CKD

-   Goal BP \< 120/80 (Class 2B recommendation) based on SPRINT trial,
    ACC/AHA 2017, and KDIGO 2021 guidelines

-   All comers: diet (e.g. DASH) and lifestyle modifications

-   CKD without albuminuria or DM:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Start pharmacotherapy based on ASCVD risk as well as risk for other
    target organ damage

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CKD with moderate to severe albuminuria w/ or w/out DM

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ACEi or ARB titrated to maximally tolerated dose (Class 1B
    recommendation)

-   Thiazide-like diuretics (see CLICK trial for chlorthalidone in
    advanced CKD)

-   Loop diuretics can assist with volume driven HTN in patients with
    CKD 4-5

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   HTN in kidney transplant

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CCBs or ARBs are first line (Class 1C recommendation)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider stopping ACE-i/ARB if:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   GFR declines \>30% over 4 months. Consider evaluation for renal
    artery stenosis

-   K \> 5.5 despite low K diet, optimizing dose of diuretics, or adding
    K-binders

Anemia in CKD

-   Multifactorial: decreased EPO production, impaired iron absorption,
    uremic toxins suppressing bone marrow, loss of blood in dialysis
    circuit, and from GI AVMs

-   Indications for iron supplementation in non-dialysis patients

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ALL patients with TSAT \<20% and ferritin \<100 ng/mL

-   Patients with Hb \<13 and TSAT \<30% and ferritin \<500 ng/mL

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can start with PO supplementation (see Anemia section). Reassess
    iron levels in 1-3 mos; if not appropriately ↑, consider IV iron
    repletion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dialysis patients

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IV iron preferred method of repletion for HD patients with

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TSAT \< 20% and ferritin \< 200

-   TSAT \<30% and ferritin \<500 AND with Hb \< 10 OR are on EPO

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dosing: usually administered at HD sessions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   125 mg ferric gluconate at consecutive HD sessions x 8 doses

-   100 mg iron sucrose at consecutive HD sessions x 10 doses

-   Ferumoxytol 510mg at the end of two HD sessions 1-4 weeks apart

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indications for EPO

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pts with Hb \<10 who are not iron deficient (ferritin \>500) or
    whose anemia persists despite adequate iron repletion

Hyperkalemia (Goal K \< 5.5)

-   Patients with diabetic nephropathy (T4 RTA) and CKD 5-ESRD are at
    the highest risk

-   Strategies to mitigate hyperK

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Low K diet (\< 40-70 mEq/day or 1500-2700 mg/day)

-   Loop diuretics

-   GI cation exchangers

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Patiromer (Veltassa): binds K in colon in exchange for calcium

-   Sodium zirconium cyclosilicate (Lokelma): binds K throughout
    intestine in exchange for sodium and H+

-   Sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexelate): binds K throughout
    intestine in exchange for sodium; do not use as chronic therapy due
    to risk of intestinal ischemia/necrosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Treat metabolic acidosis

Mineral bone disease in ESRD

-   Avoid calcium supplementation in mild or asymptomatic hypocalcemia

-   Replace vitamin D to \>20 (weak evidence)

-   Phos goal \< 5.5

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sevelamer: use lowest dose effective to achieve Phos \< 5.5

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Phos 5.5-7.5: initial dose 800 TID with meals

-   Phos 7.5-9.0: initial dose 1200-1600 TID with meals

-   Phos \> 9: initial dose 1600 TID

-   Can titrate dosing by 400 to 800 mg per meal at 2-week intervals

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Restrict dietary phos to 900 mg/day

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PTH goal in CKD3: 2x ULN

-   PTH Goal in ESRD: 2-10x ULN

Diabetes in CKD

-   Individualize A1C goals. Both the ADA and VA-DOD have guidelines for
    selecting A1C targets

-   Treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Metformin remains first-line but should be dose-reduced based on
    eGFR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   eGFR \> 45: Maximum daily dose of 2000mg/day (1000mg bid)

-   eGFR \< 45: Reduce max daily dose to 1000mg/day (500mg bid)

-   eGFR \< 30: Discontinue if high risk for volume mediated
    AKI/chronically ill

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   SGLT-2 inhibitors for patients with eGFR \>25 reduces progression to
    ESRD and death from renal or cardiovascular causes (Evidence:
    DAPA-CKD, EMPA-KIDNEY, CREDENCE)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Expect a GFR decline of up to 30% after initiation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Finerenone (non-steroidal MRA): would ask Nephrology for help if
    considering this option since relatively new and increased risk for
    hyperkalemia (Evidence: FIDELIO)

Dialysis initiation

-   Early (CKD3a or 3b) referral to Nephrology has better outcomes

-   Uremic symptoms: fatigue, sleep disturbance, n/v, decreased
    appetite, dysgeusia, itching, hiccupping

-   Refractory hyper K

-   Refractory hypertension

-   Plot your patient's eGFR using the graph function in EPIC or CPRS to
    determine trajectory (normal age-related decline after age 60 is \~
    1ml/min/m2)

Renal Replacement Therapy (RRT) Basics -- Daniel Motta

Background/Terminology

-   **Dialysis** (diffusive clearance): solutes diffuse down
    concentration gradients through a semipermeable membrane separating
    blood and dialysate

-   **Dialysate** (dialysis bath): electrolyte solution used to create
    concentration gradient for dialysis. Customizable to treat specific
    electrolyte and acid-base derangements

-   **Effluent**: fluid removed during dialysis or ultrafiltration

-   **Ultrafiltration** Hydrostatic pressure "pushing" water through a
    membrane. There is no dialysate solution used during
    ultrafiltration. There is some associated cponvective clearance, as
    solutes are removed via solvent drag. The effluent in this case is
    isotonic to plasma.

-   **Total ultrafiltration (UF**): overall ultrafiltration volume
    produced during treatment

-   **UF net**: net ultrafiltrate volume removed from the patient by the
    machine. The overall volume can be completely replaced (net even),
    partially replaced, or not replaced at all. UF net is the difference
    between UF and the volume replaced in the circuit

-   **Timing of dialysis**: There are several studies in this space
    (IDEAL, IDEAL-ICU, AKIKI, STARRT, ELAINE). In both the outpatient
    and the inpatient setting, there is no compelling evidence that
    early start dialysis improves mortality compared to later starts

Outpatient modalities

-   Intermittent hemodialysis (iHD)

-   In home hemodialysis

-   Peritoneal dialysis (PD)

If someone with ESRD is admitted

-   Urgent ESRD consult if acute need (AEIOU), otherwise can consult
    them routinely

-   Routine orders include MWF phos checks and a renal diet

-   For PD patients, their diet can be more liberal and include low phos
    only or even regular diet (Can just ask what diet he/she follows at
    home)

Acute Setting

-   Indications (AEIOU): AKI leading to life-threatening changes in
    fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance or toxic ingestion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acidosis: severe metabolic acidosis (serum pH\<7.1) refractory to
    correcting volume status or other electrolyte derangements

-   Electrolytes: severe hyperkalemia \>6.5 despite medical management
    (e.g. loop diuretics, IV fluids, GI cation exchangers, correcting
    acidemia, etc.)

-   Intoxication: dialyzable toxins and medications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Alcohols: ethylene glycol, methanol, isopropyl alcohol, diethylene
    glycol, and propylene glycol

-   Medications: lithium, salicylates, valproic acid, phenytoin,
    barbiturates, carbamazepine, vancomycin, aminoglycosides, etc.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Overload: Severe fluid overload (e.g. pulmonary edema) refractory to
    diuretics

-   Uremia: uremic complications include encephalopathy, pericarditis,
    platelet dysfunction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can perform furosemide stress test to help predict who is likely to
    recover kidney function

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If Lasix naïve, administer 1mg/kg as a bolus. If on a loop diuretic,
    administer 1.5 mg/kg as a bolus

-   If within the hour they have made 200 cc of urine, then they are
    likely to regain kidney function

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Modalities

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   iHD: Ideal for removal of toxins (e.g. alcohols, dialyzable meds).
    Use with caution in hypotensive patients

-   CRRT: Set a rate of volume removal (typically 0-200 cc/hr)🡪 less
    rapid fluid/electrolytes shifts🡪 better tolerated in patients with
    hemodynamic instability

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Anti-coagulation options to prevent clotting of circuit

    -   None

    -   Heparin (preferred). Can be either within the circuit or
        systemic if indicated for another reason (e.g. DVT/PE)

    -   Citrate (need to monitor calcium frequently)

-   Complications of CRRT: infections, hypophosphatemia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Access

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dialysis catheter (aka: Vascath)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-tunneled catheter (Trialysis) used for acute dialysis

-   Different lengths depending on site (see procedures section)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tunneled dialysis catheter (ex: Permcath)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Typically used as a bridge to fistula/graft placement

-   Placed by IR

Peritoneal Dialysis Peritonitis

Background

-   Typically occurs due to contamination with pathogenic skin bacteria
    during exchanges or due to exit-site/tunnel infection

-   Usually presents with cloudy effluent fluid and abdominal pain. Can
    also be asymptomatic

-   Important history to obtain: recent contamination, accidental
    disconnection, endoscopic or gynecologic procedure, as well as the
    presence of constipation or diarrhea

-   Definitive diagnosis requires 2 of the following:

-   Clinical features consistent with peritonitis, Positive dialysis
    effluent culture, Dialysis effluent with WBC \> 100 with PMN \> 50%

Evaluation

-   Examine catheter exit site

-   Culture peritoneal fluid (requires specific technique, done by
    Nephrology)

-   Peritoneal cell count with diff, gram stain and culture

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Obtain peripheral blood cultures if there is concern for sepsis

Management **[(requires Nephrology involvement)]{.underline}**

-   All PD orders, intraperitoneal antibiotics, and prescription
    adjustments should be directed by ESRD consult service (page them
    overnight if concerns)

-   Treatment with intraperitoneal antibiotics should be started
    immediately after specimens have been obtained if there is high
    clinical suspicion

-   Empiric antibiotics regimen should cover both gram-positive and
    gram-negative organisms, typically with Vancomycin and third
    generation cephalosporin

-   Systemic antibiotics are generally not necessary unless pts have
    systemic signs of sepsis

-   Patients with relapsing, recurrent or repeat peritonitis will likely
    need catheter removal

Secondary prevention

-   Treatment with intraperitoneal OR IV antibiotics (for any infection
    requiring \> 1 dose of antibiotics) requires prophylaxis for fungal
    peritonitis with either

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Nystatin 400,000 to 500,000 units orally TID

-   Fluconazole 200 mg every other day or 100 mg qdaily

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dialysate should be drained the day of endoscopies or gynecological
    procedures

Intravenous Fluids -- Chandler Montgomery

Indications for IV fluid

-   Restoration or maintenance of tissue perfusion

-   Correction of electrolyte abnormalities

-   Nutritional supplementation in those without reliable enteric access

Categorized into crystalloids and colloids

-   Crystalloid = water + electrolytes

-   Colloid = water + proteins/large molecules

Terms

-   Osmolality: osmoles of solute per L of solution

-   Tonicity: ability to induce movement of water across a membrane
    (i.e., effective osmolality)

-   Buffer: anions such as lactate, acetate, gluconate which are
    metabolized to bicarbonate in vivo with the goal of sustaining
    normal plasma pH

Crystalloids

-   Isotonic fluids used for volume resuscitation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   After \~ 30 mins, redistribute such that only 25% remains w/in
    intravascular space

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Balanced solutions (e.g. Lactated Ringer's \[LR\], Plasma-Lyte)=
    have electrolytes concentrations similar to plasma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NS may lead to renal vasoconstriction, AKI, hemodynamic instability,
    increased mortality

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   SMART and SALT-ED: balanced solutions had lower rates of death, new
    renal replacement therapy, or persistent renal dysfunction compared
    to NS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Situations where NS may be preferred

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cerebral edema/traumatic brain injury

-   Hypovolemic hyponatremia

-   Pre-existing hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis (e.g. after vomiting
    or over diuresis)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Notes on LR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The small amount of K in LR (\~4 mEq/L) is unlikely to significantly
    exacerbate hyperkalemia

-   Lactate in LR is sodium lactate. No hydrogen ions are being added to
    plasma

Common crystalloid solutions

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 11%" />
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 6%" />
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 8%" />
<col style="width: 11%" />
<col style="width: 10%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
<col style="width: 13%" />
</colgroup>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>Fluid</th>
<th>Na</th>
<th>Cl</th>
<th>K</th>
<th>Ca</th>
<th>Mg</th>
<th>Glucose</th>
<th>Buffer</th>
<th>Osmolarity</th>
<th>Tonicity</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Plasma</td>
<td>~140</td>
<td>~100</td>
<td>~4</td>
<td>~2.4</td>
<td>1.0</td>
<td>~0.85</td>
<td>Bicarb ~24</td>
<td>~290</td>
<td>NA</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Normal 0.9% saline</td>
<td>154</td>
<td>154</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>308</td>
<td>Isotonic</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Lactated Ringer’s</td>
<td>130</td>
<td>109</td>
<td>4.0</td>
<td>2.7</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>Lactate 28</td>
<td>273</td>
<td>Isotonic</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Plasma-Lyte/</p>
<p>Normosol</p></td>
<td>140</td>
<td>98</td>
<td>5.0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>3.0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td><p>Gluconate 23</p>
<p>Acetate 27</p></td>
<td>295</td>
<td>Isotonic</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>D5W + 150 mEq HCO3-</td>
<td>150</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>Bicarb 150</td>
<td>300</td>
<td>Isotonic</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>3% Saline</td>
<td>513</td>
<td>513</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>1026</td>
<td>Hypertonic</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>D5W</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>50</td>
<td>0</td>
<td>252</td>
<td>Hypotonic</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Colloids

-   Albumin: extracted from human plasma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   5%: use after plasma exchange

-   25%: more concentrated; raises oncotic pressure and restores
    intravascular volume

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Uses: post-LVP, diagnosis and treatment of hepatorenal syndrome, SBP
    (see Hepatology section)

-   Evidence base for use outside of above indications is poor (SAFE
    trial)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Blood products: packed RBCs, FFP, cryoprecipitate

Acid-Base -- Ned Hardison, Trey Richardson

Background

-   Abnormal serum H+ concentrations lead to impaired cellular function
    (cardiac arrest, vasodilation, decreased response to
    catecholamines), electrolyte abnormalities (e.g. hypo- and
    hyperkalemia, hypo- and hypercalcemia), impaired glucose metabolism,
    impaired drug metabolism, and other complications that translate to
    increased morbidity and mortality

-   ABG/VBG reference ranges

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   pH = 7.36-7.44 (\~7.32-7.40)

-   PCO2 = 36-44 mmHg

-   pO2: 60-100 mmHg

-   HCO3 = 22-26 mEq/L

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Useful formulas

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   pH on ABG = VBG pH + 0.035

-   Anion Gap= Na-(Cl+Bicarb), normal = 12-14

-   Calculated Osmolarity= 2\[Na\]+ (\[Glucose\]/18) + (\[BUN\]/2.8)

-   Osmolar gap= Measured osmolarity -- Calculated osmolarity

-   Winter's formula for respiratory compensation for AGMA:

    expected pCO2 = 1.5 (serum bicarb) +8 ± 2

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Shortcut: Expected $pCO_{2} \approx last\ two\ digits\ of\ pH$

General Approach to Acid-Base Derangements

-   Step 1: Determine if the patient is acidemic or alkalemic (look at
    the pH)

-   Step 2: Determine the primary disorder (metabolic or respiratory)

-   Step 3: Calculate anion gap (see section below)

-   Step 4: Is there appropriate compensation?

-   Step 5: Evaluate for secondary disorders

Anion Gap Metabolic Acidosis (AGMA)

Background

-   Na+ is the predominant cation in normal plasma. Cl- and HCO3- are
    the predominant anions. There are anions that are not directly
    measured (e.g. most binding globulins, immunoglobulins, clotting
    factors, and other proteins). These unmeasured anions are
    responsible for the normal anion gap of \~12 meq/L. When there are
    extra unmeasured anions within the plasma, the anion gap increases

Differential

-   GOLDMARK: Glycols, oxyproline (acetaminophen metabolite), L-lactate,
    D-lactate, methanol, ASA, renal failure/uremia, ketoacids

    Evaluate for secondary disorders

-   Corrected bicarbonate

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Corrected $HCO_{3}$ = patient's $HCO_{3}$ + (patient's anion gap -
    12)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Corrected $HCO_{3}$ \> 26, coexisting metabolic alkalosis,

-   Corrected $HCO_{3}$ \< 22 coexisting non-AG metabolic acidosis

Osmolar Gap

-   If there is an anion gap, it is worthwhile to always calculate an
    osmolar gap. You will be surprised the number of toxic ingestions
    you catch this way

Non-Anion Gap Metabolic Acidosis (NAGMA)

Differential

-   **HARDUP**: hyperalimentation (starting TPN), acetazolamide use,
    RTA, diarrhea, uretosigmoid fistula, pancreatic fistula

-   There are two places from which people can waste bicarbonate- the
    kidneys and the gut

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The urine anion-gap, which corresponds to unmeasured urinary NH4+
    (primary means of renal acid excretion), can differentiate between
    the two.

-   Urine anion gap (only useful In setting of NAGMA) = Unmeasured
    cations (NH4+) -- unmeasured anions = UNa + UK -- UCl

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Positive value 🡪 low NH4+ 🡪renal losses

-   RTA

-   Carbonic anhydrase inhibition: acetazolamide, topiramate

-   Adrenal insufficiency

-   Normal saline infusion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ne-***GUT***-ive value 🡪 high NH4+ 🡪 kidneys working appropriately 🡪
    GI losses

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diarrhea

-   Pancreatic fistula

-   Ureterosigmoidostomy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Caveat: Proximal RTA has a normal distal urine acidification and has
    a negative urine AG

Managing Metabolic Acidosis

-   Lactic acidosis is the most common cause AGMA that we encounter

-   In general, avoid use of bicarbonate to treat lactic acidosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Remember: H^+^ + HCO3^-^ \<-\> H2CO3 \<-\> H2O + CO2. While
    administering bicarbonate will transiently improve pH, carbonic acid
    will eventually form and ultimately worsen acidemia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In acute NAGMA, reasonable to give bicarbonate when bicarb \<12 or
    pH \<7.1-7.2

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pay close attention to other electrolyte levels, especially K+ as it
    shifts back into cells

Metabolic Alkalosis

Background

-   Metabolic alkalosis occurs as a primary disorder or as compensation
    for respiratory acidosis. A thorough history and exam can usually
    clarify which of these two scenarios is occurring

-   In order for metabolic alkalosis to occur, there has to be both an
    inciting phase (e.g. volume depletion) and a maintenance phase (e.g.
    hypochloremia or hypokalemia)

Presentation

-   Most symptoms of metabolic alkalosis (confusion, nausea, vomiting,
    tremors) occur as a result of other electrolyte abnormalities
    (hypocalcemia, hypokalemia)

-   Serum pH of \>7.55 is likely the threshold where symptoms will
    develop

Causes

-   Saline responsive (e.g. hypochloremia)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   True volume depletion

-   NG suction/nausea/vomiting

-   Diuretic use

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Saline refractory

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hypokalemia

-   Milk-alkali syndrome

-   Mineralocorticoid excess states

-   Bartters syndrome

-   Gitelman's syndrome

Treatment

-   Saline responsive/hypochloremia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If volume deplete, then normal saline is treatment of choice

-   If alkalosis develops in setting of diuresis, then make sure
    replacing KCl and consider acetazolamide

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Saline refractory

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hypokalemia: replenish potassium stores

-   Hyperaldosteronism: see Endocrinology section for more detail

-   Bartter syndrome and Gitelman syndrome: replace electrolytes and
    refer to Nephrology

Electrolytes

Hypercalcemia -- Rebecca Choudhry, Trevor Stevens

Background

-   Total serum calcium \>10.5

-   Most (99%) Ca^2+^ is anhydrous and stored in bone. The remaining 1%
    is 60% bound (mostly to albumin) and 40% ionized and able to exert a
    physiologic effect

-   Remember, there is an inverse relationship between pH and free
    Ca^2+^ . As pH declines, serum Ca increases due to H+ binding to
    albumin and releasing Ca^2+^

-   Don't forget to correct calcium level if hypoalbuminemia (or check
    ionized calcium level)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Corrected Ca^2+^ = ((Normal albumin -- Patient's albumin) x 0.8)) +
    Patient's Ca^2+^

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   This equation is less reliable at very low albumin

Presentation

-   Ca^2+^ \> 12 can cause shortened QT interval, 2nd and 3rd degree
    heart block, ventricular arrhythmias, and ST elevations mimicking MI

-   Severe manifestations uncommon at Ca^2+^ \< 14

-   "Stones, bones, thrones, belly groans, and psychiatric overtones"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bone pain, Polydipsia/polyuria: due to nephrogenic DI,
    Nausea/constipation, Depressed mood/cognitive impairment, Decreased
    level of consciousness

Evaluation

-   Measure PTH

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Normal or ↑ PTH

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Primary hyperparathyroidism: ↑ Ca+2 and ↓ PO4-3

-   Tertiary hyperparathyroidism (autologous secretion of PTH in
    CKD/ESRD)

-   Familial hypercalciuric hypercalcemia (often asymptomatic, no
    treatment required)

-   Li toxicity

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ↓ PTH

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (PTHrP)

-   Malignancy (boney metastases)

-   Excess vitamin D intake

-   Granulomatous disease: 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D, 25-hydroxyvitamin
    D, or ACE level

-   Milk-alkali syndrome

-   Medications (classically HCTZ)

-   Thyrotoxicosis

-   Adrenal insufficiency

Management

-   If Ca+2 \< 12 and asymptomatic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Encourage PO hydration

-   Normal saline if hypovolemic

-   Evaluate for underlying cause

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If Ca+2 \> 12 with symptoms or Ca \> 14

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Trend Ca q8 hrs, EKG, monitor on telemetry; strict I/Os ± foley
    catheter

-   Volume expansion with NS bolus followed by continuous infusion at \~
    200cc/hr

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Goal UOP 100-150cc/hr

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Add loop diuretic (Lasix) once patient is volume expanded

-   Bisphosphonates

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Zoledronic acid 4mg IV (EGFR \>60), pamidronate 90mg IV (EGFR 15-60)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If Ca+2 \>14 or neurologic symptoms, consider subq (not intranasal)
    calcitonin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   VUMC: requires approval from an oncology or endocrine attending

-   Tachyphylaxis after \~48H

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Additional Information

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CHF: consider early addition of a loop diuretic, especially if
    volume overloaded

-   ESRD with hypercalcemia (rare), oliguric AKI not responsive to IVF,
    or severely elevated Ca 16-18: consult Endocrine and Nephrology
    early

-   Sarcoidosis or lymphoma: consider glucocorticoids

Hypocalcemia -- Trey Richardson

Background

-   Can be divided into low PTH and high PTH states

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Low PTH

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Magnesium deficiency

-   Post-operative for parathyroidectomy

-   DiGeorge syndrome

-   Medications: bisphosphonates, denosumab, aminoglycosides, gadolinium

-   Infiltrative disease: sarcoid, hemochromatosis, malignancies

-   Autoimmune hypoparathyroidism

-   CRRT (if using regional citrate anticoagulation)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High PTH

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Late-stage CKD

-   Hyperphosphatemia

-   Vitamin D deficiency

-   Alkalemia (Serum Ca is inversely proportional to pH)

-   Pseudohypoparathyroidism/Parathyroid resistance

-   Consumption/deposition: pancreatitis, rhabdomyolysis, some
    osteoblastic metastases

-   Sepsis or critical illness

Presentation

-   Chvostek (facial muscle twitching), Trousseau's sign (carpopedal
    spasm) , laryngospasm, seizures, widened QRS and arrhythmias

-   Hemodynamic instability

Evaluation

-   Check PTH, albumin, iCal, VBG, Vitamin D

-   Review medications for possible offenders

Management

-   Under most circumstances there is no need to replace calcium.
    Instead, focus on correcting the underlying perturbation (e.g.
    acidemia, hypomagnesemia, treating pancreatitis, etc. )

-   If hemodynamic instability, cardiac electrical instability, or
    seizures, then aggressive intravenous replacement is warranted.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Also consider preemptive repletion for patients requiring
    high-volume of blood transfusions (citrate in blood products can
    cause hypocalcemia)

-   1 g of CaCl is equivalent to 3 grams of Ca Gluconate

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid treatment in hyperphosphatemia, advanced CKD/ESRD, and
    rhabdomyolysis

Hypernatremia -- Lauren Chan

Overview of dysnatremias

-   Fluctuations in serum Na reflect fluctuations in plasma free water

-   Sodium is the major driver of tonicity. The clinical signs and
    symptoms of serum Na fluctuations are related to changes in tonicity
    with most profound effects on cerebral tissue

-   Two major mechanisms maintain plasma osmolarity between 275 and 290:
    Thirst and secretion of ADH. When these mechanisms malfunction,
    dysnatremias occur

Background

-   Definition: Na+ \>145

-   Hypernatremia = decreased free water

-   Almost always due to inadequate free water intake (ICU patients,
    dementia, limited mobility, tube feeding/TPN, impaired
    thirst/adipsia from hypothalamic stroke). Hospital acquired
    hypernatremia is iatrogenic and correlates with poor outcomes

-   Can also occur from: Na+ overload (salt poisoning, iatrogenic from
    NS infusion, over correction), osmotic diuresis (hyperglycemia,
    SGLT-2 inhibitors, urea, mannitol), diabetes insipidus

Presentation

-   Lethargy, irritability, confusion

-   Seizures, coma, hemorrhagic stroke, or subarachnoid hemorrhage (from
    the effects of hypertonic serum on cerebral vasculature)

Evaluation

-   Step 1: Treat underlying cause (vomiting, hyperglycemia,
    medications)

-   Step 2: Determine volume status. If severely hypovolemic, the
    patient will need IV crystalloid to restore volume in addition to
    free water

-   Step 3: Estimate and replace free water deficit (FWD):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   FWD = TBW x \[(serum Na/140) - 1\]

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Step 4: Account for ongoing insensible losses and electrolyte free
    water clearance

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Rule of thumb for accounting for electrolyte free water clearance.
    *This is in addition to replacing free water deficit*

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   0-1 Liter of urine output: ignore, no need to replace

-   1-3 Liters of urine output: replace half of the losses

-   \>3 liters of urine output: replace all urine losses

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   No evidence that overcorrecting hypernatremia is harmful. In fact,
    there is increased mortality with overly cautious correction or
    under correction

-   If able, replace free water enterally. Otherwise, administer D5W
    intravenously

Additional Information

-   Suspected DI: Consult Nephrology (may require desmopressin or may
    receive desmopressin once stabilized to differentiate between
    central and nephrogenic DI)

-   Hypokalemia: giving K decreases total amount of free water you are
    giving the patient

Hyponatremia -- Lauren Chan

Background

-   Definition:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mild: Na+ 130-134

-   Moderate: Na+ 125-129

-   Severe: Na+ \<125

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hyponatremia occurs when free water reabsorption (i.e ADH is on) or
    intake exceeds free water excretion

Presentation

-   Mild to moderate symptoms: lethargy, N/V, dizziness, confusion,
    fatigue, cramping

-   Severe symptoms: obtundation, coma, respiratory arrest, seizure

Evaluation and Management

-   Step 1: Serum osm 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \>295: Hyper-osmolar, presence of other molecules that contribute to
    serum osmolarity 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Glucose, mannitol, iodinated contrast

-   If hyperglycemic, corrected serum Na+ = measured Na+ +
    1.6\*\[(glucose -- 100)/100\]  

    -   If corrected Na+ is normal, treat hyperglycemia; not a water
        balance problem 

    -   If corrected Na+ is low, there is hypotonic hyponatremia +
        coexisting hyperglycemia 

-   Renal failure (urea) and ethanol: Ineffective osmoles that can
    freely diffuse across cells and do NOT lead to hyponatremia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   275-295: Iso-osmolar 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pseudohyponatremia due to hypertriglyceridemia, paraproteinemia, or
    lipoprotein X: Serum Na not actually low, due to how the lab is
    calculated 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \<275: Hypo-osmolar 🡪 step 2

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Step 2: Urine osm

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Surrogate for ADH activity

-   Uosm \<100 or Uosm \< Sosm correlates with low ADH (the body is
    appropriately trying to get rid of water so ADH is appropriately
    suppressed)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Primary polydipsia: free water intake\>output  

-   Tea and toast: lack solute to effectively concentrate urine 

-   Beer drinkers' potomania: mixture of the two above

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Uosm \>100 or Uosm \> Sosm correlates with high ADH 🡪 Step 3 (the
    body is retaining water, so ADH is elevated)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Step 3: Urine Na

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Is ADH on in the setting of decreased effective arterial blood
    volume (EABV) or decreased mean arterial pressure (i.e. appropriate
    ADH)?

-   UNa \<20: Low EABV 🡪 RAAS upregulation with Na avidity  appropriate
    ADH release

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If true volume depletion, then trial 500cc-1L NS bolus and monitor
    serum Na. IVF bolus  increase EABV  decrease ADH release   free
    water excretion

-   If edematous state (e.g. heart failure or cirrhosis), then
    decongestion with diuretics may improve serum Na

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   UNa \>40: euvolemic with no stimulus for ADH 🡪 SIADH

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   SIADH from: n/v, malignancy, meds, surgery, pulmonary disease,
    hormones, pain, bladder distension: ↑ ADH out of proportion to
    stimulus  

    -   Treat with water restriction. Can add NaCl or urea tabs if fluid
        restriction is severe 

    -   Water restriction (L/day) = 600 / uosm (600 mEq Na in American
        diet/day)

    -   Salt wasting: diuretics, cerebral salt wasting (aka hypovolemic
        SIADH), SSRIs

    -   Get a Chest Xray -- look for treatable pulmonary etiologies
        (effusions, pneumonia etc.)

    -   Other: hypothyroidism, adrenal insufficiency 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If still stumped, can check a FeNa and measure a serum uric acid

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   FeNa \<0.5 % suggests appropriate ADH activity

-   High uric acid suggests some degree of volume depletion and
    appropriate ADH activity

    Rate of correction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute (\<48 hrs)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If symptomatic, give 150 cc bolus 3% NaCl up to two times.

-   Monitor Na+ q1-2 hr

-   Goal is an initial rapid 4-6 mEq/L correction and then hold

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   May require Hypertonic Saline infusion with DDAVP clamp if at risk
    of over-correcting

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Chronic (\>48 hrs or unknown, higher risk for osmotic demyelination
    if corrected too quickly):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Goal Na+ correction rate 4-6 mEq/L over 24 hrs (Max 8mEq/L)

    When to call Nephrology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If you are worried about rapid over-correction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High risk patients are those with rapidly reversible causes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Low solute states (Beer drinker's potomania, psychogenic polydipsia,
    tea-toast) as soon as they decrease their excess free water intake,
    they will rapidly clear free water

-   Volume depletion: As volume is replaced and the stimulus for ADH
    release is switched off, then patients will rapidly clear the excess
    free water if they have normal underlying kidney function

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High risk for ODS includes chronic liver disease, Na \<105 meq/dL,
    alcoholism, and malnutrition

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consideration of DDAVP clamp

Hyperkalemia -- Mengyao Tang, Amanda Morrison

Background

-   Causes:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cellular shifts: acidemia, rhabdomyolysis, TLS, beta blockade

-   Aldosterone deficient states: T4 RTA, primary adrenal insufficiency

-   Decreased distal tubular delivery: volume depletion

-   Decreased clearance: AKI, CKD, ESRD

-   Excessive intake

-   Medication-related: ACEi, ARB, MRA, NSAIDs, TMP/SMX, digoxin,
    heparin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pseudo-Hyperkalemia: hemolysis, severe leukocytosis

-   Symptoms are rare, but usually manifest as cardiac dysrhythmias

    Evaluation

-   Confirm hyperkalemia with repeat BMP

-   Check EKG for hyperkalemic changes (sensitivity for EKG findings in
    hyper K is poor)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   K+ 5.5-6.5: peaked T waves, prolonged PR interval

-   K+ 6.5-8: prolonged QRS, loss of P wave, ST elevation, ectopic beats

-   K+ \>8: sine wave pattern, asystole, PEA, VF

Management

-   If EKG changes or signs of instability

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Calcium gluconate 1g IV (effective within 3-5 min)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stabilizes cardiac membrane for \~60mins

-   SHOULD BE REPEATED HOURLY while hyperkalemic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Shift K+ (temporizing measures)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   D50 with regular insulin 10 units (can order using Adult
    Hyperkalemia order set in Epic)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Use 5 units if there is renal impairment

-   Lasts for 4-6hrs (can be longer in renal impairment)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Correct acidosis: consider using isotonic bicarb

-   Beta agonists (e.g. high-dose albuterol nebulizer); lasts 2-4 hrs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Note that typical albuterol nebulizer is 2.5mg, need 10-20mg to have
    an effect

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Increase K+ excretion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Loop diuretic: if the kidneys work, use them

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If there is AKI or a volume deficit can administer with IVF

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Volume expansion with IVF: increases distal Na delivery and K
    excretion. NS and LR are likely equally effective.

-   GI cation exchangers

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Kayexalate (Polystyrene sulfonate): only effective if having BMs.
    60g PO q2h until bowel movement (If using oral, ensure patient is
    having bowel movements and is not obstructed, could cause bowel
    injury/ necrosis). PO can take up to 6hrs to work. Consider per
    rectal administration for faster action but DO NOT GIVE WITH
    SORBITOL per rectum

-   Lokelma (Sodium-zirconium-cyclosilicate) 10 g PO TID for 48 H.
    Actively exchanges K for Na within the small bowel and works within
    2 hours. Remember to stop once the K is normal since can cause
    hypokalemia. Also keep in mind the high Na content of Lokelma
    (400mg/5g dose of lokelma). Valtessa (Patiromer) Is an alternative,
    though not on VUMC Inpatient formulary.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hemodialysis: Consult Nephrology early if severe hyper K+

Hypokalemia -- Peter Thorne, Patrick Steadman

Background

-   Potassium (K+) \< 3.5 mEq/L

-   98% of total body K+ is intracellular (majority in muscle cells)

-   Goal: prevent life threatening complication (e.g. arrhythmia),
    replace deficit, elucidate cause

-   Insulin and catecholamines (beta adrenoreceptors) are key drivers of
    transcellular shifts

-   H+ and K+ will trade places to maintain electroneutrality

Presentation

-   Malaise, weakness, myalgias, decreased gastrointestinal motility

-   EKG changes:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mild: ST segment depression, decreased T wave amplitude

-   Severe: U-waves (most commonly seen in precordial leads V2 and V3)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Severe hypokalemia can lead to rhabdomyolysis

Evaluation

-   History: decreased K+ intake, increased entry into cells (e.g.
    elevated beta-adrenergic activity, hypothermia), GI losses, urinary
    losses (diuretics, hypomagnesemia, RTA, tubular defects,
    hyperaldosteronism)

-   If concomitant metabolic alkalosis: Normal/low BP suggests diuretic
    use, vomiting or Gitelman/Bartter syndromes

-   Hypertension suggests renovascular disease or primary
    mineralocorticoid excess

-   Labs: BMP, CBC, VBG, urine electrolytes, magnesium, POC glucose, CK.
    Possibly aldosterone, renin, cortisol pending clinical context

-   Imaging: Renal US, CT AP

Management

-   Check Mg, replete to 2. Give empirically while waiting for serum Mg

-   K+ preparation (route); replete to 4

-   Choice of agent:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   KCl is used for repletion in the hospital

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PO tablets for mild asymptomatic hypokalemia

-   IV can be given through peripheral (rate is 10mEq/hr, may have
    burning sensation) or central access

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   K+ bicarbonate can be dissolved and put through G tube

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Useful in patients with hypokalemia and metabolic acidosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dose:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Normal renal function: 10 mEq K+ is expected to raise serum \[K+\]
    by 0.1 mEq/L

-   Significant CKD or AKI: at risk of overcorrection

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Shortcut: multiply the mEq by the Cr = how much K+ expected to rise

-   Once K+ higher than 5.5, K+ increases much faster and rules above do
    not apply

Hyperphosphatemia -- Peter Thorne, Amanda Morrison

Background

-   Phosphate (PO4-3) \> 4.5mg/dL

-   Etiologies

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cellular shifts: cellular lysis (TLS, rhabdomyolysis), acidemia
    (lactic acidosis, DKA)

-   Increased intake/absorption or iatrogenic hyperphosphatemia (over
    repletion, vitamin D toxicity, use of Fleet's enemas, etc.)

-   Decreased phosphate clearance (acute or chronic renal disease,
    hypoparathyroidism, pseudohypoparathyroidism)

Presentation

-   Symptoms are usually secondary to coexistent hypocalcemia
    (psychosis, seizure, perioral paresthesias, muscle weakness)

-   Can cause acute phosphate nephropathy with phosphate containing
    laxatives

-   Calciphylaxis if concurrent hypercalcemia (high Ca+2 x PO4-3product)

Evaluation

-   Labs: BMP (calcium, creatinine), VBG, Vit D, PTH, PTHrP, lactate

Management

-   Acute

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If renal function normal, can often treat with IVF (promote PO4-3
    excretion)

-   Consider need for calcium supplementation (see hypocalcemia section)

-   If renal function impaired and severe hypocalcemia present, consider
    hemodialysis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Chronic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Usually secondary to chronic renal failure, goal PO4-3 3.5-5.5 in
    CKD patients

-   Renal diet (low PO4-3)

-   PO4-3 binders: Ca+2 containing (calcium carbonate and calcium
    acetate) and non Ca+2 containing (sevelamer, lanthanum, and iron
    based such as ferric citrate)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sevelamer is significantly more expensive than calcium containing
    binders

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Given 3 times daily with meals, started at 800mg (Can be ↑ to
    1,600mg TID)

-   Should not be given if patient is not eating

-   Calcium acetate: started at 1334mg TID with meals

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Limit dose changes to chronic binders upon discharge

-   Need to avoid calcium containing binders in patients with
    calciphylaxis

Hypophosphatemia -- Peter Thorne

Background

-   Required for metabolic pathways (ATP production)

-   Most renal reabsorption occurs in proximal tubule via
    sodium-phosphate cotransporter

-   Common causes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Internal redistribution, reduced intestinal absorption

-   Refeeding syndrome

-   Alkalemia

-   Phos binders on purpose or inadvertently (calcium, aluminum,
    magnesium antacids)

-   Excessive loss (diarrhea, CRRT, increased urinary excretion)

-   Proximal tubular dysfunction such as in Fanconi Syndrome

-   Hyperparathyroidism causes renal phos wasting

-   Post-parathyroidectomy leading to hungry bone syndrome

-   Vitamin D deficiency or resistance

Presentation

-   Mild hypophosphatemia (serum \>2.0) rarely symptomatic

-   PO4-3\< 2.0: muscle weakness

-   PO4-3\< 1.0: heart failure, respiratory failure, rhabdomyolysis,
    seizures

-   Failure to wean from ventilator

Evaluation

-   Urine PO4-3 level if cause not readily apparent

-   Calculate Fe PO4-3 (\[U PO4-3 x PCr x 100\]/\[P PO4-3x UCr\])

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fe PO4-3 \< 5% = normal renal response to hypophos: redistribution
    or ↓ absorption

-   Fe PO4-3 \> 5% = renal phos wasting

Management

-   Caution replacing in patients with impaired renal function. Start
    with half suggested dose

-   If K+ \> 4 and patient requires IV repletion, may need to use sodium
    PO4-3 in place of K+ PO4-3 IV; PO preferred unless severe or
    symptomatic, or patient cannot take PO

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   K-Phos neutral: oral, each 250mg tablet has 8 mmol of PO4-3 and
    1.1mEq of K+

-   K+ PO4-3: IV, each mL has 3mmol PO4-3, 4.4 meq K+

-   Na+ PO4-3: IV, each mL has 3mmol PO4-3

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PO4-3\>1.5: PO: 40 -- 80 mmol K+Phos neutral (aim for 1 mmol/kg)
    divided into 3-4 doses/day

-   PO4-3 1.25 - 1.5: oral 100 mmol K+ PO4-3neutral in 3-4 divided doses
    if asymptomatic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IV: 30 mmol K+ PO4-3over 6 hours (aim for 0.4mmol/kg) if symptomatic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PO4-3\<1.25: IV: 80mmol K+Phos over approximately 12 hours (aim for
    0.5mmol/kg)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Check serum PO4-3 2-12 hrs after last dose of PO4-3 to determine if
    additional needs

Hypomagnesemia -- Mike Tozier

Background

-   Definition: Mg+2 \< 1.8 mg/dL, most patients asymptomatic until
    \<1.2 mg/dL. Severe \[Mg+2\] \< 1 mg/dL

-   Causes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   GI losses: diarrhea, malabsorption, acute pancreatitis, EtOH use,
    TPN, vomiting, NG suction, GI fistulas, anorexia, short gut
    syndrome, small bowel bypass

-   Drugs: PPIs, loop diuretics, thiazides, digoxin, amphotericin,
    aminoglycosides, foscarnet, cisplatin, calcineurin inhibitors,
    laxatives, pentamidine

-   Kidney losses: post-ATN diuresis, Bartter syndrome and Gitelman
    syndrome

-   Cellular shifts: DKA treatment/recovery, refeeding, hungry bone
    syndrome, correction of metabolic acidosis, pancreatitis, EtOH
    withdrawal

-   Other: DM, hyper Ca, hyperthyroid, hyperaldosteronism, burns,
    lactation, Vit D deficiency, heat, prolonged exercise, mitral valve
    prolapse, pseudohypomagnesemia due to EDTA tube, lactation

Presentation

-   Refractory hypocalcemia or hypokalemia, arrhythmias, muscle weakness

-   Severe symptoms: seizures, drowsiness, confusion, coma, arrhythmias

-   Vertical nystagmus, tetany (Chvostek sign, Trousseau), tremors,
    fasciculations

Evaluation

-   EKG: Initially wide QRS, peaked Ts. Progresses to wide PR,
    diminished T, arrhythmias

-   Labs: Ca+2, K+, can use FEMg (order urine Mg+2 and Cr, serum Cr and
    Mg) or 24-hour urine for Mg to distinguish renal vs GI etiology
    (FEMg \>2% renal, \<2% GI)

Management

-   Correct underlying cause, replete based on severity (Dosing below
    for normal GFR)

-   Oral: asymptomatic patients, can cause GI symptoms, not well
    absorbed

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sustained release (Mg Chloride or Mg L-lactate) better tolerated and
    absorbed, though standard preparations (Mg oxide) are faster acting

-   Mg chloride: 3-4 tabs BID (total 30 to 56 meq \[15 to 28 mmol\]) for
    severe hypo Mg

-   2-4 tabs daily (total 10 to 28 meq \[5 to 14 mmol\]) for mild hypo
    Mg

-   Mg oxide: 400-800 mg BID (20 to 40 mmol \[40 to 80 meq\]) for
    mod-severe hypo Mg

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Intravenous: for symptomatic patients or if GI intolerance to oral

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mg \<1 mg/dL: 4 to 8g of MgSO4 (32 to 64 meq \[16 to 32 mmol\]) over
    12 to 24 hrs

-   Mg 1 to 1.5 mg/dL: 4 g MgSO4 (16 to 32 meq \[8 to 16 mmol\]) over 4
    to 12 hrs

-   Mg 1.6 to 1.9 give 1 to 2 grams MgSO4 (8 to 16 meq \[4 to 8 mmol\])
    1-2 hrs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   VUMC only has 4g bags of IV mag so would need to ask nurses to only
    infuse 1/2 bag

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infusion rate should not exceed 2 g/hr to minimize urinary excretion

Additional Information

-   Renal impairment: replete with caution, reduce dose by 50-75% and
    monitor closely

-   If persistent hypo Mg in patients requiring diuresis, try K-sparing
    diuretic (e.g. amiloride)

-   Treat concomitant hypokalemia, hypocalcemia or hypophosphatemia

-   In patients with concomitant hypophos and hypocalcemia, IV Mg alone
    🡪 worse hypophos

Approach to Urinalysis -- Madelaine Behrens, Laura Binari, Patrick
Steadman

Background

-   3 components: Gross evaluation, dipstick analysis, microscopic exam
    or urinary sediment

-   Indications: dysuria, gross hematuria, fever + GU symptoms, AKI,
    volume overload

-   If foley, obtain sample from catheter, not the urine bag

-   Spinning urine

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   At VUMC, take sample to lab on 4th floor to centrifuge the sample at
    1500 rpm for 5 minutes, remove supernatant and then resuspend
    sediment, place drops of urine on the slide, examine with microscope

-   At the VA, there is a microscopy room where you can spin urine as
    well

-   Ideally, the specimen should be a fresh catch (\<2-4 hours old);
    Beware: casts like to migrate to the edges of the coverslip

    Gross Evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Turbid: infection, precipitated crystals, or chyluria

-   Color: red urine (broad DDx, see "Hematuria" section, includes
    certain meds, porphyrias, myo/hemoglobinuria), white (chlyuria,
    phosphate crystals, propofol), green (methylene blue, amitriptyline,
    propofol), pink (uric acid crystals, post-propofol infusion), black
    (hemoglobinuria/myoglobinuria)

Dipstick Analysis

-   Quality of sample: should have zero squamous epithelial cells

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Specific gravity: normal = 1.010

-   Surrogate for urine osmolality and hydration: can have falsely high
    specific gravity if large particles (contrast, glucose) present

-   Trick: Last 2 digits of S.G. x 30 = Uosm. For example: S.G. is
    1.013; 13 x 30 = 390 mOsm/L

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Urinary pH: normal pH is 5.5-6.5

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Alkaline pH: bicarb suppl, vegan diet, urease producing organisms
    (staghorn calculi)

-   Acidic pH: uric acid stones, appropriate response to acidemia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Proteinuria: dipstick detects albumin ONLY (not paraproteins)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ddx: primary glomerular dx vs secondary glomerular dx (DM, amyloid,
    infxn, sickle cell, etc.) vs tubular vs overflow (multiple myeloma)

-   Transient: due to volume depletion, CHF, fever, postural,
    exercise-induced

-   Mild albuminuria (30-300 mg/day) not detected by standard dipsticks

-   Degree of dilution affects semiquantitative measurement (1+,2+,3+)

-   Follow up with spot protein to Cr ratio or 24 hr urine collection
    (nephrotic range \>3.5 g/day)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Heme (see "Hematuria" section): False (+) if semen, false (-) w/
    ascorbic acid

-   WBC

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Possibilities: False (+) due to contamination with squamous cells.
    If bacteria 🡪 consider UTI/pyelo with hematuria 🡪 inflammation

-   Ddx includes UTI: gram positive/negative, chlamydia, ureaplasma; TB,
    malignancy, viral infxn, kidney stones, GN, urethritis, steroids,
    cyclophosphamide use

-   Sterile pyuria (no bacteria): DDx interstitial nephritis, renal
    tuberculosis, nephrolithiasis, recently treated UTI, prostatitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ketones

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Never normal in urine; only detects acetic acid

-   Ddx: DKA, starvation ketoacidosis, pregnancy, keto diet

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Glucose: max threshold at proximal tubule exceeded (\~serum glucose
    180 mg/dL)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   DM, Cushing's, liver/pancreatic dx, SGLT2i use; or a primary defect
    of proximal reabsorption (w/phosphaturia, uricosuria, amino aciduria
    think Fanconi syndrome)

-   False (-) with ascorbic acid

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Leukocyte esterase: enzyme released by lysed neutrophils,
    macrophages

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Associated with pyuria and infections

-   False (-) from hematuria, glucosuria, or concentrated urine

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Nitrites: reduction of urinary nitrates by nitrate reductase

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Certain bacteria (e.g. Enterobacteriaceae) express, others (e.g.
    Enterococci) do not

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bilirubin: conjugated = water soluble (passes through glomerulus),
    unlike unconjugated

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Liver dysfunction and biliary obstruction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Urobilinogen: end product of conjugated bilirubin, normally
    \~1.0mg/dL is normal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can be elevated due to hepatocellular dx or hemolysis

Microscopic Examination of the Urine Sediment

-   Cells

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dysmorphic RBCs (sign of GN), squamous epithelial cells
    (contamination), tubular cells (abnormal, indicates renal dx),
    neutrophils (UTI, AIN, TB, sterile pyuria), eosinophils (think AIN,
    not sensitive thus cannot exclude diagnosis)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Casts

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hyaline (pyelo, CKD, prerenal azotemia, normal subjects), RBC (GN,
    interstitial disease), WBC (acute interstitial nephritis, GN, pyelo,
    inflammation), epithelial - renal tubular cells (ATN, interstitial
    nephritis, nephritic sx, heavy metal ingestion), granular or waxy
    (presence of kidney disease, but nonspecific), muddy brown casts
    (ATN), fatty (nephrotic syndrome)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Crystals

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ca+2 oxalate (envelope/dumbbell shape), uric acid (rhombic/rosette
    shaped, classically formed in acidic urine), cystine (hexagonal,
    found in cystinuria), Mg+2 ammonium phosphate (aka struvite stones,
    from increased ammonia production, in setting of urease producing
    bacteria such as Proteus or Klebsiella UTIs)

-   Calcium oxalate crystals + AKI, consider ethylene glycol
    intoxication

-   Uric acid crystals + AKI, consider tumor lysis syndrome

Hematuria -- Madelaine Behrens, Laura Binari, Patrick Steadman

Background

-   Definition: 3 urinalyses with three or more RBC/hpf; 1 urinalysis
    with 100 RBC/hpf or gross hematuria (1 cc blood/L urine can induce
    color change)

-   Causes:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Transient hematuria: exercise-induced, menses, trauma,
    cystitis/prostatitis

-   Concurrent pyuria/dysuria: consider urinary tract infection or
    bladder malignancy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Malignancy risk factors: male sex, age \> 50, smoking Hx, exposures
    to benzene/aromatic amine, cyclophosphamide, indwelling foreign
    body, pelvic irradiation, chronic UTIs, heavy NSAID use, urologic
    disorders (nephrolithiasis, BPH)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Recent URI: think infection related glomerulonephritis, IgA,
    vasculitis, anti-GBM

-   Positive family Hx of hematuria: consider PKD, sickle cell disease

-   Bleeding from other sites: think inherited/acquired bleeding
    disorder, anticoagulation

-   Unilateral flank pain: ureteral calculus, renal malignancy, IgA
    nephropathy

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Glomerular             IgA Nephropathy, IgAVasculitis, Lupus Nephritis,
                         Infection related glomerulonephritis,
                         ANCA-associated, Anti-GBM disease, Genetic (thin
                         Basement Membrane Nephropathy/Alport Syndrome), MPGN
  ---------------------- -----------------------------------------------------
  **Kidney**             Pyelo, RCC, PKD, sickle cell disease, papillary
                         necrosis, Malignant HTN, arterial embolism, vein
                         thrombus

  **Ureter/Bladder**     Cystitis, Urothelial Malignancy, nephrolithiasis,
                         ureteral stricture, hemorrhagic cystitis
                         (chemo/rads), traumatic Foley/procedure

  **Prostate/Urethra**   BPH, prostate cancer, TURP, urethritis (STI)

  **Other**              Exercise-induced, bleeding diathesis, meds (AC),
                         menses, TB, schistosomiasis
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Evaluation

-   Step 1: Confirm the presence of hematuria

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dipstick positive heme: urinary RBCs (hematuria), free myoglobin or
    free hgb

-   Centrifuge the urine

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Red sediment 🡪 true hematuria (urinary RBCs)

-   Red supernatant +

    -   Positive dipstick: myoglobulin or hemoglobin

    -   Negative dipstick: porphyria, pyridium, beets, rhubarb, or
        ingestion of food dyes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Step 2: Determine if there is a GLOMERULAR or NON-GLOMERULAR source
    of bleeding

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Characteristics                                                              
  of Glomerular vs                                                               
  Extraglomerular                                                                
  Bleeding**                                                                     
  ------------------- ------------ ---------------- ------------- -------------- ---------
                      Color (if    Clots            Proteinuria   RBC morphology RBC casts
                      gross                                                      
                      hematuria)                                                 

  Glomerular          Red, Cola,   Absent           May be \>500  Dysmorphic     May be
                      Smoky                         mg/day        RBCs present   present

  Extraglomerular     Red/Pink     Present/Absent   \<500 mg/day  Normal         Absent
                                                                  (isomorphic)   
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

-   Glomerular bleeding

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Isolated hematuria: differential includes IgA nephropathy, thin BM
    dx, Alport's

-   Nephritic syndrome (new proteinuria, pyuria, HTN, edema, rise in
    Cr): post-infectious GN, MPGN, ANCA vasculitis, Goodpasture's, lupus
    nephritis

-   Workup: anti-GMB, anti-DNase/ASO, ANA, ANCA, C3, C4, cryo, Hep B/C,
    HIV

-   Indications for renal biopsy: glomerular bleeding + risk factors for
    progressive disease, including albuminuria \> 30 mg/day, new
    hypertension \> 140/90 or significant elevation over baseline BP,
    rise in serum creatinine

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Extraglomerular bleeding

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If historical clues suggest nephrolithiasis, start with non-con CT
    A/P

-   Gross hematuria otherwise should be evaluated with CT A/P w/ and w/o
    contrast (CT urography); will need to see Urology for cystoscopy
    (often done as outpatient referral)

    -   CT Urography is more sensitive than IV pyelogram for renal
        masses and stones

    -   Pregnant patients: renal and bladder ultrasound preferred over
        CT

-   If clots are passed, more likely to be secondary to lower urinary
    source; high burden of clots poses a risk of obstruction (urologic
    emergency)

-   If extraglomerular bleeding with clots: hematuria catheter needs to
    be placed ASAP (2 valve catheter, 20-24 Fr (!); page urology if
    nursing unable to obtain)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Who needs cystoscopy: All patients with clots and all patients with
    gross, nonglomerular hematuria in whom infection has been ruled out

Kidney Transplant Medicine -- Trey Richardson

Introduction

-   The goal of this section is to serve as a guide for tackling the
    most common transplant complications as well as offer a few tips for
    managing immunosuppression while kidney transplant patients are
    admitted to the hospital

Alphabet soup

-   PRA: panel reactive antibodies

-   DSA: donor specific antibodies

-   CMV (-/+): indicates the CMV status of both the recipient and the
    donor

-   FK506 or FK: another name for tacrolimus

-   KDPI: Kidney donor profile index used to "grade" the quality of the
    donated organ

-   X/6 MM: indicates the number of HLA subtypes that are mismatched
    between donor and recipient

Infections in Kidney Transplant Recipients

Background

-   Infections in a kidney transplant recipient can be divided into 3
    phases

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \<1-month post-transplant

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Surgical site infections, nosocomial infections (e.g. C. Diff,
    CAUTIs, and CLABSIs), and donor-derived infections/reactivation of
    latent recipient infections predominate

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   1-6 months post-transplant

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Depleted immune-system regenerates🡪 increased risk for disseminated
    fungal (e.g. PJP, histo/blasto) and viral infections (HSV,
    adenovirus)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \>6 months post-transplant

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Risk for atypical infections persists, but common community acquired
    syndromes should still be on the differential

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   This section will focus on the most common infection in kidney
    transplant recipients- infections of the urinary tract

Evaluation

-   UA with culture 

-   Examine the native kidneys (CVA tenderness) AND the allograft
    (almost always in RLQ, denervated so the graft itself will not be
    tender, but the surrounding soft-tissue may)

-   Renal U/S (of both allograft and native kidneys) or CT AP if

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Early post-op (1 month)

-   Recurrent (2+ episodes in year)

-   History of nephrolithiasis or if sepsis/bacteremia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Blood cultures if systemic signs/symptoms

-   Consider testing for C. urealyticum, and sending fungal and AFB
    urine cultures if UA is recurrently positive but culture negative

Management

-   Remove or replace indwelling catheters

-   Review prior culture susceptibilities (if available)

-   Empiric antibiotic regimens

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Asymptomatic bacteriuria: treat with fluoroquinolone or beta lactam
    for 5-7 days if \<3 mo post-transplant

-   Simple cystitis: fluoroquinolones (ciprofloxacin 250 BID or Levaquin
    500 mg QD), Augmentin (500 mg BID), 3rd gen cephalosporin
    (cefpodoxime 100 mg BID or cefixime 400 mg daily) or nitrofurantoin
    100 mg BID (if GFR\>30, only treats cystitis since drug only
    concentrates in the urine)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \< 6 mos post-transplant: treat for 10-14 days

-   \>6 mos post-transplant: treat for 5-7 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Complicated UTI/pyelonephritis (cover Pseudomonas, gram negatives
    and Enterococcus): ceftriaxone 2g daily (preferred), cefepime 2g
    q8hrs (add Vancomycin when using cephalosporin if suspicious for
    enterococcus) or pip-tazo 3.75g q6hrs, can also use meropenem 1g q8h
    (need ID approval)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Treat for 14-21 days

-   For stable patients with mild complicated UTI, can consider giving
    more narrow empiric antibiotics: Augmentin 875 mg BID or
    ciprofloxacin 500 mg q12h

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   MDR UTI: Consult transplant ID

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Options: meropenem-vaborbactam, ceftolozone-tazobactam,
    ceftazidime-avibactam

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In pts with PCKD, include lipophilic antibiotic (such as
    ciprofloxacin) to penetrate cysts

    Prevention

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bactrim used for PJP prophylaxis during first 6 mos post-transplant
    also prevents UTIs

-   Basic infection prevention measures for all comers (e.g. hydration,
    frequent voiding, wiping front to back, voiding after sexual
    intercourse)

Acute Kidney Injury of Kidney Transplant

Background

-   Most patients admitted to medicine services with kidney transplants
    are \>3 months post-op. Therefore, we are typically not managing
    perioperative complications such as delayed graft function, or
    hyper-acute rejection. Below are the most common causes of acute
    kidney injury in kidney transplant recipients

    Evaluation

-   Signs and symptoms of UTI?

-   Assess volume status

-   Review meds for recent medication changes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Common offenders: NSAIDs, ACEi, diuretics, azole antifungals

-   Medication non-adherence

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tacrolimus (FK) or cyclosporine (CsA) level

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   FK levels increase with n/v, diarrhea due to alterations in
    p-glycoprotein expression within inflamed GI tract

-   FK toxicity also causes diarrhea and volume depletion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Proteinuria

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Transplant patients with 1 g/day proteinuria usually get biopsies

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Review donor characteristics (CMV status, PRA, % HLA antibodies
    present, DSAs)

-   BK PCR: consider only if unclear source of AKI and no recent titers

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Serum PCR is test of choice

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Renal transplant U/S (costly and not always warranted)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \< 1 week post-transplant: If acute graft dysfunction, look for
    thrombosis, urine/ureter leak

-   \> 1 week post-transplant

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cr does not respond to 48 hours of current management

-   Lack of clear, reversible causes

-   Hydronephrosis (can occur after stent removal 4-6 wks after
    transplant or due to perinephric fluid collection)

-   Arterial stenosis (↑ velocities in renal artery \-- very concerning
    when velocity \>300), tardus parvus waveforms)

-   Perinephric abscess with recurrent UTI/pyelonephritis

-   Urinoma (usually first 2-3 weeks), hematoma (after a biopsy)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Unique findings

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Resistive indices: Reflect central renal vascular compliance. High
    indices in transplant patients signify parenchymal problem
    (rejection, infection, ATN)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Biopsy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   To differentiate ATN vs. rejection vs. BK nephropathy vs. recurrent
    disease (FSGS, lupus, etc.)

-   Post biopsy care

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Watch for bleeding and HTN

-   Blood can get into collecting system, then the capsule, and into the
    perinephric space causing Page Kidney (aka Pressure Tamponade)

    -   Compressed renal vessels 🡪 RAAS surge 🡪 rapid, severe HTN (STAT
        page the renal fellow)

Kidney Transplant Rejection

Background

-   Rejection is divided into acute vs. chronic and T-cell mediated or
    antibody mediated

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pathologists can determine the type of rejection and the chronicity
    by observing the structures that are acutely involved (e.g.
    tubulitis, glomerulitis, arteritis, and capillaritis) as well as the
    time course of involvement (e.g. presence of fibrosis)

-   Structures exhibiting fibrosis represent chronic rejection that is
    unlikely to respond to treatment, whereas acute inflammation may be
    amenable to acute therapies

-   This section will focus on acute rejection since this is the
    clinical entity we will most likely manage while on the wards

Acute Rejection

-   Acute T cell mediated rejection

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infiltration of the graft by lymphocytes and inflammatory cells
    characterized by tubulitis, interstitial inflammation, and arteritis
    (on occasion)

-   Treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High dose glucocorticoids (methyl prednisolone) is first line (\~ 5
    days)

-   Thymoglobulin (polyclonal Ig anti-T cell)

    -   Use depends on severity of rejection

    -   Indicated if Cr fails to improve after steroids

-   T cell subsets are measured during treatment until depleted

-   Tacro target levels are reset to \~8-10 if treated for acute T cell
    mediated rejection

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute antibody mediated rejection (ABMR)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Donor specific antibody mediated rejection characterized by
    glomerulitis, peri-tubular capillaritis (microcirculation
    inflammation), complement deposition (C4d staining), and presence of
    DSA

-   Treatment = B-cell depletion therapy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IV methyl prednisone 500 mg IV x 3-5 days

-   Plasmapheresis (If with high titers of DSA)

-   IVIG 2 g/kg (max 140 g)

-   Rituximab 375 mg/m2

Kidney Transplant Immunosuppression

Background

-   Most patients with kidney transplants are on triple therapy with an
    anti-metabolite (azathioprine or mycophenolate compound) or mTOR
    inhibitor + calcineurin inhibitor + prednisone

-   You may also come across patients who are on monthly infusions with
    belatacept, a selective T-cell co-stimulation blocker

    Calcineurin Inhibitors

-   Tacrolimus (FK), cyclosporine (CsA)

-   Envarsus XR is a once a day long acting formulation of tacrolimus

-   Common side effects: worsening kidney function (mediated by
    vasoconstriction to the afferent arterioles), HTN (treat with CCBs),
    diabetes, hand tremors, headache, nausea, thrombotic m
    icroangiopathy, type 4 RTA (hyperkalemia), gingival hyperplasia

    M

    TOR Inhibitors

-   Sirolimus, Everolimus

-   Major side effects: poor wound healing, rarely pneumonitis

    Anti-metabolites

-   Azathioprine

-   Mycophenolate preparations: mycophenolate mofetil (Cellcept, MMF),
    Mycophenolic acid (Myfortic)

-   Side effects: bone marrow suppression (hold if lymphopenia), GI
    upset (hold if diarrhea)

    Additional Information for Overnight Admits:

-   Do not change immunosuppression

-   Exception: If pt has severe diarrhea, can hold night tacro dose and
    inform day team

-   Daily tacrolimus or cyclosporine level (order qAM at 5:00). Always
    order tacrolimus or cyclosporine dose at 6am and 6pm regardless of
    what time patient takes it at home (lab can only run am tacro levels
    at a certain time iin batches)

-   Exception: if late afternoon admission, consider paging the fellow
    (since it is early) and ask if they want the evening dose held until
    AM level is back

-   Transplant patients with normal kidney function can have regular
    diet

Neurology

Editor: Meghan Nicholas, MD, Lauren Osborne, MD, and Eesha Oza, MD

Reviewed by Matthew Meriweather, MD

Common Neurologic Problems

**The Neurologic Exam -- Nicholas Mallett**

Higher Integrative functions

-   Attention: are they awake, asleep but arouse, drowsy, somnolent,
    sedated, etc. Can they participate in the exam? Can test attention
    direction by spelling "world" backwards or giving days of week or
    months of year backwards

-   Orientation: to person, place, time, and +/- situation

-   Memory/Fund of knowledge: do not formally assess unless part of
    complaint. For memory, can be bedside testing of 3 or 5 word recall
    after 5 minutes

-   Language: look for dysarthria (slurred speech), aphasia (nonsensical
    speech or inability to produce words, often test by asking to name
    objects), repetition

Cranial Nerves

-   CN1: smell, typically do not test this

-   2: vision, check with pupillary light response, visual field
    testing, or visual acuity if complaint

-   3, 4, 6:: extraocular movements. 6 abducts, 4 raises in and up and
    helps with intorsion, 3 does rest and is in pupillary light reflex
    (constricts pupil)

-   5: facial sensation in V1, V2, and V3, compare left and right

-   7: facial movements/strength, compared left and right, upper (eyes)
    and lower (mouth)

-   8: hearing. Can do finger rub or just assess when talking during
    interview

-   9, 10: palate elevation, cough/gag if intubated

-   11: shoulder shrug from trapezius and head turn from
    sternocleidomastoid

-   12: tongue protrusion: should be midline. If abnormal, deviates to
    side of injury

Motor

-   Strength: manual muscle testing (MMT) scale ranging from 0 to 5

0 = No muscle activation

1 = trace muscle activation (eg muscle twitch) but unable to move across
ROM of joint

2 = muscle action with gravity eliminated (eg in plane of bed), with
full ROM in that plane

3 = action against gravity only and not against resistance

4 = action against some resistance

5 = full strength against resistance

-   Other aspect of motor: muscle tone (decreased, normal, increased),
    tremor (at rest, with action, or with sustained antigravity position
    \[posture\]), pronator drift, any other abnormal movements (if not
    sure what it is, just describe what you see)

-   If altered or sedated -- look for spontaneous movement, compare left
    and right sides, assess response to noxious stimuli (ie nailbed
    pressure)

Sensation

-   Light touch is simplest \-- is it the same left and right and in
    uppers and lowers

-   Unless sensation loss or changes is part of chief complaint,
    typically do not assess other modalities which include pinprick,
    temperature (hot or cold), vibration, proprioception

Reflexes

-   Grading scale: 0 = areflexia, 1+ = decreased but present, 2+ =
    normal, 3+ increased without clonus but often with spread to
    adjacent joints, 4+ increased with clonus (sustained response to one
    tap)

Increased reflexes often indicate central etiology, but 3+ can be normal
in young adults

Decreased reflexes often indicate lower motor neuron or peripheral
etiology, can be normal in older adults

-   Biceps: C5-C6, musculocutaneous nerve

-   Brachioradialis: C5-C6, radial nerve

-   Triceps: C7-C8, radial nerve

-   Patellar: L2-L4, femoral nerve

-   Achilles: S1, tibial nerve

-   Babinski -- scrap along lateral edge of foot then across top in
    lower case "r" motion. Often easier to describe by direction big
    toes moves -- up or down

Coordination

-   Finger-nose-finger and heel-knee-shin testing, looking for smooth,
    non-ataxic movements, and can also pick up on tremor with FNF

Gait

-   Station: can stand still with feet with feet less than shoulder
    width apart, assess posture

-   Natural gait: Smooth coordinated with normal arm swing

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Symmetric? Stride length? Narrow or wide based? Speed?

-   Lateralizing findings (ie circumduction, shoulder droop)?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Toe walk: tests balance, strength of distal lower extremities

-   Tandem walk (heel to toe): should be able to balance without falling
    or stepping to the side, can help detect ataxia

Altered Mental Status (AMS) - Aisha Suara

Background

-   Definition: change in a pt's baseline cognition. Medical diagnosis
    is encephalopathy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can be hypoactive (lethargic) or hyperactive (agitated)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Risk factors: Functional impairment (hard of hearing, visually
    impaired, bed-bound), age \> 75, dementia/neurodegenerative
    diseases, prior brain injury (stroke, TBI), depression,
    ETOH/substance use disorder, sensory impairment, recent surgery

Etiologies: Consider MOVE STUPID mnemonic

-   Metabolic (Hypo/hypernatremia, Hypercalcemia)

-   Oxygen (Hypoxia)

-   Vascular (CVA, Bleed, MI, CHF)

-   Endocrine (Hypoglycemia, Thyroid, Adrenal)

-   Seizure (postictal state)

-   Trauma

-   Uremia

-   Psychiatric

-   Infection

-   Drugs -- intoxication, withdrawal, or medications

-   Delirium -- see "Delirium" section in psychiatry

Evaluation

-   Consider broad toxic, metabolic, and infectious workup as
    appropriate

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TSH, Vit B1 (whole blood), Vitamin B12, CBC, CMP, BCx, UA with rfx
    UCx, CXR, VBG, Glucose, UDS, +/- RPR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Review medications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Beer's Criteria, sedatives, anticholinergics, benzos/EtOH toxicity
    or withdrawal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Head imaging in the setting of focal neurologic findings: if acute
    focal deficits, consider activating stroke alert

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Start with CT Head -- ischemic strokes take up to 24 hours to show
    up on CT

-   Consider MRI if high concern for stroke, inflammatory changes or
    infection

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   LP should be performed if there is any concern for meningitis

-   EEG is reasonable with fluctuating mental status or seizure-like
    activity

Management

-   Management of underlying etiology

-   Consider empiric thiamine supplementation

-   See \"Delirium\" in section in psychiatry for nonpharmacologic and
    pharmacologic management

Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) - Nicholas Mallett

Background

-   Progressive weakness, often asymmetric and profound, with no sensory
    loss

-   Combination of LMN and UMN findings

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   LMN findings: weakness, flaccidity, hyporeflexia, fasciculations

-   UMN findings: weakness, spasticity, hyperreflexia, pathologic
    reflexes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bulbar symptoms: dysphagia, increased saliva production (they are
    not swallowing it), changes in voice

-   Tongue fasciculations are best assessed while tongue rests in mouth
    and observed for \~30 seconds but can be hard to be certain of
    (symmetric movements are typically not fasciculations). A light can
    be helpful, and atrophy if present, can help differentiate from
    normal movements

-   Pseudobulbar affect (inappropriate laughing or crying) is relatively
    common in ALS and other neurodegenerative disorders.

-   FVC is an important respiratory marker for function.

Evaluation

-   EMG/NCV is gold standard using the El Escorial or Awaji Criteria for
    diagnosis

-   Exclude mimicking lesions, which may be treatable (see below)

Management

-   Pts with ALS are ideally treated with a multidisciplinary team of
    neurologists, pulmonologists, PT, OT, and SLP

-   Given the extensive, specialized care requirements, the Office of
    Outpt Referral Assistance can assist in getting uninsured pt
    established with specialists

-   Three medications have been shown to add a few months to survival:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Riluzole: PO, requires CBC/LFT monitoring, AE: GI distress and
    general weakness

-   Edaravone: IV, QD x2weeks every month, AE: headache, bruising

-   Sodium Phenylbutyrate: PO, recently approved by FDA (9/2022), shown
    to delay ventilator-dependence by \~7 months, AE: GI distress

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Otherwise, symptomatic management

Mimics of ALS

-   Primary lateral sclerosis: UMN-only disease, less common than ALS
    with slower progression. Suspected to be on spectrum with ALS.

-   Cervical spine lesions: UMN changes in UE with LMN pattern in LE.
    MRI can reveal lesion

-   Multifocal motor neuropathy: rare autoimmune disorder with LMN-only
    signs. Responds to IVIG. Can be anti-GM1 Ab positive. EMG/NCV
    distinguishes from ALS.

-   Kennedy Disease: X-linked genetic disorder with progressive LMN
    pattern, endocrine disorders, and androgen-resistance symptoms
    (gynecomastia, defective spermatogenesis)

-   Inclusion body myositis: Can be asymmetric with grip weakness and
    quadriceps weakness. Biopsy and atrophy pattern usually
    distinguishes it. CPK typically runs 500-800.

-   Polymyositis/dermatomyositis: proximal weakness in BUE/BLE, CPK
    typically runs \>1000, usually younger onset (30-40s), no UMN signs.

Brain Masses

Background

-   Neoplasm is the biggest concern

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   90% of malignant brain masses are metastatic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most commonly: lung, RCC, breast, melanoma

-   Highest bleeding risk: melanoma, thyroid, choriocarcinoma, RCC

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Primary brain tumors

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gliomas: WHO Grade I-IV

    -   Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM): WHO Grade IV; large heterogenous
        masses with edema; heterogenous contrast enhancement; can cross
        the corpus callosum (butterfly pattern)

    -   Lower grade gliomas include oligodendrogliomas and astrocytomas

-   Meningioma: usually low grade

    -   Can be left alone and monitored with yearly MRI

    -   If symptomatic, may need resection/radiation

-   Ependymoma: uncommon. Can cause CSF outflow obstruction

-   CNS lymphoma: diffuse white matter involvement with mass effect,
    diffusion restriction on MRI with prominent contrast enhancement;
    can cross the corpus callosum

    -   Usually B-cell, initially responds significantly to steroids

Presentation

-   A significant number of brain lesions are detected incidentally

-   If a pt has a first-time seizure, brain mass needs to be ruled out
    with head imaging

-   Symptoms: headache (usually constant, severe), seizure, and focal
    neurologic deficits

Evaluation and Management

-   Imaging: MRI w/wo contrast provides the most information

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Findings suggesting malignant lesions: Marked edema, multifocal
    lesions, or presence at gray-white junctions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   LP may be indicated if herniation risk is low, particularly if
    concerned for infection

-   Biopsy (with assistance from Neurosurgery) will ultimately be needed
    in most cases

Management

-   Work up for primary malignancy, including CT C/A/P and PET

-   Steroids are generally indicated for treatment of edema

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Decadron 10 mg IV to start; then transition to 4mg IV Q6H with SSI
    and PPI

-   If pt is clinically stable and there is a concern for CNS lymphoma,
    consider delaying steroids to increase yield of cytology and biopsy,
    unless edema/mass effect warrants emergent treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Symptomatic tumors need evaluation by Neurosurgery for resection
    consideration and Radiation Oncology

Inpatient Headache -- Lauren Waskowicz

Background

-   Important to distinguish primary and secondary headache

-   "Red flags" for secondary headaches (SNOOPPP): systemic symptoms,
    Neurologic symptoms, Onset that is sudden (thunderclap), Older age
    (new headache \>40), Progression or evolution in previous headaches,
    Postural component, Pregnancy

-   Other red flags: preceding trauma, headache awakening pt from sleep,
    no headache-free intervals, thunderclap headache (maximal intensity
    develops within 11 minutes or less)

Evaluation

-   Get a good description of where the pain is, when it started,
    associated symptoms, and assess for "red flag" features listed above

-   If there are any red flag features, imaging and workup are necessary

-   Imaging depends on highest suspicions, but CTA head/neck is
    appropriate to evaluate for aneurysm, dissection or vasospasm
    (including neck to consider dissection). If any focal signs, MRI is
    generally preferred; venous imaging can be beneficial in headaches
    with features of elevated ICP

-   If no red flag features are present, then workup is not necessary,
    and focus is on treatment

Management

-   NSAIDs and Tylenol for infrequent headaches, but consistent use
    (\>2-3x/week) runs the risk of rebound headaches

-   Triptans for migraine, but contraindicated in patients with CAD,
    uncontrolled hypertension, and previous stroke. They must be used
    within 6 hour of onset

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   There are theoretical concerns of serotonin syndrome when used with
    SSRI/SNRIs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Migraines:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   "Migraine cocktail": 1L fluid bolus, 4g Mg, IV Compazine(10mg) OR
    Phenergan(20mg) with Benadryl (25mg)

-   2^nd^ line: Depakote 1000 mg IV, Decadron 10mg IV , +/- Toradol 30mg
    IV, Flexeril 10mg PO

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cluster headache

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Triptans, high flow O2 (\>10 L), can consider intranasal Lidocaine
    if no arrhythmia history

Outpatient Headache -- Lauren Waskowicz

+-------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Type        | Presentation               | First-line Treatment     |
+=============+============================+==========================+
| Tension     | Mild-to-moderate           | Abortive: Acetaminophen  |
|             | visor-like                 |                          |
| (most       | pressure/tightness without | Preventative: TCAs,      |
| common)     | significant photophobia,   | SNRIs                    |
|             | phonophobia, or nausea     |                          |
+-------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Migraine    | Unilateral, pulsating,     | Abortive: NSAIDs,        |
|             | moderate-to-severe pain,   | acetaminophen, triptans, |
|             | lasting 4-72hrs, worse     | CGRP antagonists         |
|             | with activity and improves |                          |
|             | with sleep. Associated     | Preventative:            |
|             | with nausea, photophobia,  | Anti-depressants,        |
|             | phonophobia, ± aura        | anti-hypertensives,      |
|             |                            | anti-seizures            |
+-------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Cluster     | Severe (often extreme)     | Abortive: 100% FiO2 at   |
|             | unilateral                 | 12L/min for at least 15  |
|             | peri-orbital/temporal      | mins, triptans,          |
|             | stabbing pain, associated  | indomethacin             |
|             | with lacrimation,          |                          |
|             | rhinorrhea, sweating,      | Preventative: Verapamil  |
|             | swelling of face, and      |                          |
|             | visual changes. Occurs in  |                          |
|             | "clusters" with each       |                          |
|             | individual episode lasting |                          |
|             | minutes-to-hours           |                          |
+-------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+
| Medication  | 15 days of the month with | Stop offending           |
| Overuse     | a pre-existing headache    | medication, typically    |
| (Rebound)   | disorder, overusing an     | via taper. Headache will |
|             | abortive treatment, often  | worsen before it gets    |
|             | presents as worsening      | better (important to     |
|             | headache despite increased | warn pt of this). Start  |
|             | intake of medication.      | concurrent daily         |
|             | Using an abortive agent    | prophylactic headache    |
|             | \>2-3x/week can cause.     | medication.              |
|             | Seen with NSAIDs, APAP,    |                          |
|             | caffeine-based medications |                          |
|             | (Excedrin, Fioricet),      |                          |
|             | triptans, ergotamines, and |                          |
|             | opioids.                   |                          |
+-------------+----------------------------+--------------------------+

Evaluation:

-   Assess for red flag symptoms (refer to "Headache: Inpt")

-   If no red flag symptoms present, no need for further work-up

-   Assess lifestyle factors that can be contributing to headache: good
    sleep hygiene, routine meal schedules, regular exercise, and
    managing migraine triggers

Medication Overview

-   Abortive

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Triptans: Cannot be used more than 10 days/month. Avoid in pts with
    significant coronary artery disease, prior strokes, and prior MI.
    Associated with vasospasm.

-   CGRP antagonists: Newer options. Insurance typically requires
    failure of 2 abortive triptans prior to approval. Refer to Neurology
    Clinic for this.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Preventative

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Amitriptyline: indicated for both migraine and tension-type. Helps
    with sleep and comorbid depression. Most common side effects (SE) =
    dry mouth, sedation

-   Topiramate: has the best evidence among migraine meds. It can
    theoretically help with weight loss. Most common SE = sodas taste
    bad, sedation, paresthesias

-   Propranolol: useful for relative lack of interactions. Mild
    cardiac/blood pressure effects compared to other beta-blockers. Most
    common SE = drowsiness

-   Magnesium oxide: reduces headache frequency with almost no SE. Start
    400mg daily, can go up to 800mg BID. Patients can increase their
    dose until they get diarrhea.

-   Riboflavin (vitamin B2): mild effect but effectively has no side
    effects. 400mg daily.

-   Gabapentin: can be useful if HAs have stabbing/electric quality.
    Main SE = sedation

-   Venlafaxine: useful for migraines with significant vestibular
    symptoms (dizziness). SE = hypertension/tachycardia.

-   Verapamil: can be used for migraine and cluster headaches. Can use
    ER formulation

-   Botox: can be administered every 3 months. Can be very effective,
    but pts generally will have had to fail multiple medications for
    insurance to approve à refer to neuro resident clinic

-   CGRP receptor modulators (mostly injections) such as Rimegepant are
    newer options

Multiple Sclerosis

Background

-   Progressive inflammatory disorder primarily manifesting with
    demyelination of the central white matter

-   Optic neuritis and transverse myelitis (spinal cord lesion) are
    common presentations

-   Generally develops over a few days; very uncommon to happen suddenly
    (e.g. pts will complain about a dark spot appearing in their vision
    that expands over several days)

Evaluation

-   MRI w/wo contrast can identify plaques and determine chronicity

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   "Active" MS plaque will contrast enhance and continues to enhance
    for weeks (even after treatment)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Modified MacDonald Criteria: ≥3 characteristic demyelinating lesions
    (\>1 cm, periventricular, infratentorial (brainstem/cerebellum/cord)
    or juxtacortical in location) with evidence of separation in time
    (active and chronic)

-   LP with studies for oligoclonal bands, IgG index, cell count and
    protein, anti-MOG, anti-AQP4

Management

-   Treat flares and optic neuritis with steroids

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Speeds up recovery, but does not improve the degree of recovery

-   Often dosing starts with Methylprednisolone IV 1gm x3-5 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If a pt with known MS has worsening symptoms that are not new, then
    recrudescence (pseudoflare) is the likely cause 🡪
    infectious/toxic/metabolic workup and imaging is needed

-   Steroid-sparing agents are the long-term therapy goal but often have
    significant adverse effects requiring monitoring:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Interferon (SQ injections): flu-like symptoms, injection site
    reactions

-   Glatiramer acetate (SQ): injection site reactions

-   Fingolimod (PO): macular edema, liver injury, increased risk of skin
    cancer

-   Teriflunomide (PO): liver injury, hair loss, immunosuppression,
    teratogenic

-   Dimethyl fumarate (PO): GI side effects, lymphocytopenia, liver
    injury

-   Natalizumab (IV): PML concern, immunosuppression

-   Ocrelizumab (IV): contraindicated in active HBV infection, cannot
    give live vaccines

-   Alemtuzumab (IV): autoimmune disease, rash, headache

Neuromyelitis Optica and Spectrum Disorder

-   Demyelinating disease due to antibodies against aquaporin-4 (on
    oligodendrocytes)

-   Classically causes optic neuritis and longitudinally extensive
    transverse myelitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can be more aggressive than MS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diagnose with NMO antibodies and MS workup as above

-   In the acute setting, exacerbations [t]{.underline}reated with
    steroids, but in severe or refractory cases may require PLEX, and
    disease modifying therapy differs from MS (typically rituximab)

Neuropathy -- Nicholas Mallett

Background

-   Peripheral neuropathy is damage to peripheral nerves. Classical
    polyneuropathy is slow, chronic, progressive sensory loss in
    length-dependent fashion

-   Common etiologies of polyneuropathy: Diabetes, chronic EtOH use,
    Vitamin Deficiencies/Toxicities, chronic HIV/HBV/HCV, Amyloidosis,
    Monoclonal Gammopathies, Hypothyroidism, autoimmune, Medication, and
    Critical Illness

-   Mononeuropathy: sensory +/- motor symptoms in single peripheral
    nerve distribution (ie carpel tunnel). Can be from local trauma,
    compression, entrapment

-   Radiculopathy is from spine nerve root localization (ie L4),
    polyradiculopathy if multiple, plexopathy is process affecting
    multiple nerves in brachial or lumbosacral plexus

-   Large Fiber Neuropathy: loss of vibration sense/proprioception

-   Small Fiber Neuropathy: loss of pain/temperature sensation -- cannot
    be dx by EMG/NCS!

Evaluation

-   Usually diagnosed clinically based on examination and history

-   Polyneuropathy presents with slow, progressive sensory loss in the
    classic "stocking and glove" distribution, usually beginning in the
    lower extremities.

-   Many patients don't realize numbness until very symptomatic (can't
    feel car pedals, burning pain, gait disturbances, etc). Can have
    +Romberg, falls in dark due to poor proprioception

-   Reduced reflexes on examination

-   In cases where exam is not sufficient, EMG/NCS can aid in diagnosis

-   Important to determine etiology behind neuropathy to attempt to
    stop/slow progression

-   Basic lab work: A1c, B12 (\<400 can cause symptoms), SPEP+IFE

Management

-   No treatment to reverse numbness, aim to treat pain if needed

-   Address underlying etiology to prevent progression

-   If rapidly progressive, consider referral to Neurology for
    evaluation

-   Neuropathic pain management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gabapentin/Pregabalin -- PROS: antiseizure benefits, headache
    treatment; CONS: dizziness, drowsiness

-   Duloxetine -- PROS: anxiety/depression effect, migraine prophylaxis;
    CONS: risk of Serotonin Syndrome/Mania

-   Amitriptyline -- PROS: depression treatment, headache prophylaxis;
    CONS: anticholinergic effects

-   Alpha Lipoic Acid -- relatively benign OTC supplement with
    antioxidant properties shown to reduce nerve hypoxia with diabetic
    neuropathy

-   Topicals: Lidocaine, Capsaicin

-   DO NOT PRESCRIBE OPIOIDS FOR NEUROPATHIC PAIN AS THEY HAVE LITTLE
    BENEFIT

Parkinson's Disease

Presentation

-   Resting tremor is typically a very early symptom, often worse on one
    side

-   Cogwheel rigidity: can be confused for paratonia (seen in demented
    or encephalopathic pts who have involuntary variable resistance
    during passive ROM)

-   Speech changes (hypophonia), hand-writing changes (micrographia),
    bradykinesia

-   Gait changes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Festination: slow start with movements that gradually build up speed

-   En bloc turning: taking multiple steps to turn around

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Anosmia and REM behavior sleep disorders are very common

Evaluation

-   Clinical diagnosis; there are some supportive imaging studies like
    DaTscan that looks for activity of substantia nigra (usually not
    necessary)

-   Clinical response to dopamine replacement is so typical that if a pt
    does not respond, it is important to consider a Parkinson-Plus
    Syndrome (see below)

Management

-   Continue home Parkinson's medications the way they take at home.
    Abrupt discontinuation can cause severe withdrawal.

-   Dopamine replacement: Carbidopa/levodopa; dosed at regular intervals
    several times a day. Generally does not need to be held during
    admission.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If pt is altered, can hold anticholinergics, MAO-B inhibitors, or
    COMT inhibitors

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dopamine agonists: can cause confusion, hallucinations, dyskinesias

-   MAO-B inhibitors (MAOIs): can cause confusion, hallucinations,
    insomnia and dyskinesias

-   COMT inhibitors: can cause confusion, hallucinations, insomnia, and
    dyskinesias

-   Anticholinergics: useful for tremor when there is not much
    bradykinesia or gait disturbances. In older pts, cognitive changes
    are a bigger concern along with hallucinations

-   Parkinson's Disease medications are rarely titrated in the hospital
    because acute medical illness worsens Parkinsonian symptoms.
    Everything will need to be re-adjusted outpt

-   Be cautious with PRN anti-emetics in pts with PD. Many work via
    dopamine antagonism. Zofran is generally the safest option

-   Similarly, many antipsychotics have dopamine antagonism. Safest
    option is quetiapine.

Parkinson-Plus Syndromes

Evaluation

-   Consider if atypical features such as bilateral symmetric onset,
    early cognitive/personality changes, cerebellar findings, or
    prominent autonomic dysfunction early

Types

-   Progressive supranuclear palsy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PD symptoms with early falls and minimal tremor

-   Vertical eye movement abnormalities

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Multisystem atrophy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Profound orthostatic hypotension without any increase in HR

-   Three types:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   MSA-A: autonomic features prominent (previously Shy-Drager Syndrome)

-   MSA-P: prominent atypical Parkinsonism features

-   MSA-C: prominent cerebellar dysfunction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lewy body dementia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Parkinsonism with prominent early cognitive impairment and
    hallucinations

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Corticobasal degeneration

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Alien limb phenomenon (affected limb doesn't belong to them)

-   Associated with apraxia and aphasia

Seizure without Status Epilepticus

Background

-   Risk factors: birth trauma, perinatal ischemia, prematurity, TBI
    with loss of awareness \> 1 hours or penetrating wound, strokes,
    brain masses (tumors, abscesses, blood), prior CNS infections, and
    recent brain surgery

-   Key for seizures: rhythmic, stereotyped event with sudden
    onset/offset

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Generally, if full body systems are involved (e.g. jerking or tonic
    activity), then there will also be loss of awareness

Evaluation

-   A clear description or recording of seizure semiology is helpful,
    including preceding aura, event description, duration, loss of
    awareness, post-ictal confusion with duration, tongue biting (and
    location), urination/defecation, frequency of events, and triggers

-   Provoked seizures can develop with medications (lower threshold),
    ASM/benzodiazepine/EtOH withdrawal, physical/mental/emotional
    stressors, hypo/hyperglycemia, significant electrolyte abnormalities
    (e.g. hyponatremia), CNS infections

-   In pts with new seizures, important to work-up potential underlying
    etiology

-   EEG is necessary for spell capture

-   MRI brain with and without contrast once stable

Management

-   You do not need to acutely treat a seizure with medication unless
    lasting longer than 5 minutes.

+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| ASMAED                    | Adverse EffectsSide effects              |
+===========================+==========================================+
| Levetiracetam (Keppra)    | Sedation and agitation, worsening of     |
| (PO/IV)                   | underlying mood disorders.               |
|                           |                                          |
|                           | Can trial B6 supplementation to help     |
|                           | with mood effects                        |
+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Valproic acid (Depakote)  | Sedation, hirsutism, PCOS, P450          |
| (PO/IV)                   | inhibitor, nausea, liver injury,         |
|                           | hyperammonemia                           |
+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Phenytoin (Dilantin)      | Sedation, gingival hyperplasia           |
| (PO)/                     |                                          |
|                           |                                          |
| Fosphenytoin (IV)         |                                          |
+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Lacosamide (Vimpat)       | Heart block, dizziness, ataxia           |
| (PO/IV)                   |                                          |
+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Topiramate (Topamax) (PO) | Kidney stones, metabolic acidosis,       |
|                           | paresthesias, weight loss, cognitive     |
|                           | slowing                                  |
+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Carbamazepine (Tegretol)  | Hyponatremia, SJS (in Han Chinese check  |
| (PO)                      | HLA), bone marrow suppression (rare)     |
+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Oxcarbazepine (Trileptal) | Similar to Carbamazepine                 |
| (PO)                      |                                          |
+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Lamotrigine (Lamictal)    | SJS/TEN, nausea, least sedating          |
| (PO)                      |                                          |
+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Zonisamide (Zonegran)     | Sedation, ataxia, nausea, confusion      |
| (PO)                      |                                          |
+---------------------------+------------------------------------------+

Non-Epileptic Spells (NES)

-   Can be very difficult to distinguish from epileptic seizures

-   Not all NES are psychogenic, such as myoclonus, tremors, and syncope

-   Features more common in PNES

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Retained awareness with bilateral extremity "seizing"

-   Opisthotonus (arching the back)

-   Talking during a spell

-   Excessively long spells (e.g. lasts hour or days)

-   Forced eye closure

-   Truncal thrusting

-   Suppressibility to touch

-   Coachability during a spell or reacting to external stimuli

-   Heavy breathing during a spell with lots of rigorous movement

-   Immediately returning to normal after a spell

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Features more common in epileptic seizures:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Seizures arising out of sleep

-   Highly stereotyped

-   Incontinence

-   Severe injuries (e.g. burns)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Try to avoid excessive BZD use

-   This requires good clinical judgement as you wouldn\'t want to
    withhold Ativan and discover that the pt was having true atypical
    seizures. The compromise would be do not repeatedly administer BZDs
    when there is suspicion for PNES as well as no evidence of response
    to prior BZD administration.

Syncopal Convulsions

-   Very common, can present with posturing and tonic-clonic movements
    happening for a few moments after syncope

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Should not last for more than 30 seconds

-   These are just related to syncope and do not typically require
    seizure medications

-   Can be associated with urinary incontinence

-   Workup

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Two-hour EEG and MRI (with and without contrast)

-   Infectious workup, BMP, CBC, blood glucose, toxicology/drug screen

-   If there is concern for convulsive syncope, (carefully) check
    orthostatic vitals

Vertigo

Background

-   Sensation of the room (or themselves) spinning or moving

-   Must distinguish from lightheadedness, presyncope, orthostasis, and
    disequilibrium (unsteady on feet) via history

-   Distinguishing between central vs peripheral pattern is useful for
    workup and management

-   Central pattern: typically less sudden onset (unless stroke),
    continuous symptoms independent of position, no/limited hearing
    loss, and may have other FND

-   Peripheral pattern: typically sudden onset, positional with severe
    nausea, tinnitus, or decreased hearing, no other FND

-   Causes best differentiated based on chronicity and triggers rather
    than description of symptoms

    Etiologies:

-   BPPV: loose otoliths; short duration (\<1min), very positional,
    nystagmus is horizontal and torsional, towards affected ear with
    posterior canal being most commonly involved; treat with particle
    repositioning maneuvers

-   Vestibular neuritis/labyrinthitis: typically follows URI or ear
    infection with unidirectional nystagmus away from affected ear;
    self-limited, but if severe/prolonged can treat with steroids

-   Meniere's disease: Vertigo, tinnitus, and low range frequency
    hearing loss. Gradually progressive. Treated with diuretics, salt
    restriction, Meclizine, and sometimes surgery or intratympanic
    injections

-   Endolymphatic leak: Usually following trauma or concussive blasts.
    Requires ENT evaluation and management. Classically a loud sound
    will cause vertigo and nystagmus

-   Vertiginous migraine: episodic vertigo associated with headaches;
    usual migraine triggers, may have aura; often positive family
    history of migraine

-   Stroke: Typically due to brainstem or cerebellar infarct; sudden
    onset; rare cause of isolated vertigo; ask about vascular RF. Also
    consider vertebral dissection or vertebrobasilar TIA

-   Drug-induced: assess recent changes in medications; includes
    codeine, aminoglycosides, macrolides, sulfamethoxazole, NSAIDs,
    prednisone, anti-malarials, diuretics, beta-blockers,
    alpha-antagonists, lithium, antipsychotics

-   Other causes: demyelinating disease (MS), epileptic vertigo (focal
    seizures), Ramsay-Hunt syndrome (Herpes zoster oticus),
    cerebellopontine angle tumors (often little vertigo as CNS
    compensates as tumor slowly grows)

Evaluation and Management

-   Careful exam of vertigo will be more helpful than random scans, but
    pt has to be symptomatic for exam to mean anything

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   HINTS Battery -- Head Impulse test, Nystagmus pattern, Test of Skew

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Only useful if pt is currently symptomatic

-   Central pattern: no corrective saccade, multidirectional nystagmus,
    skew present

-   Peripheral pattern: corrective saccade, unidirectional nystagmus, no
    skew present

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dix-Hallpike Test

-   Cerebellar testing: Finger nose finger (FNF), heel knee shin (HKS),
    mirroring, gait

-   Outpt Vestibular function testing with ENT

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Central patterns will need head and vessel imaging looking for
    vertebral dissection or basilar clots

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Often, central vertigo is due to centrally acting medications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Peripheral causes are varied and often require evaluation by ENT as
    an outpt

-   Treatment with anticholinergics like meclizine or scopolamine is
    often helpful; antiemetics if significant nausea; and
    benzodiazepines for refractory acute attacks

-   Vestibular therapy is also very beneficial

Neurologic Emergencies

Elevated Intracranial Pressure (ICP) and Hydrocephalus -- Madelaine
Behrens

Background

-   Communicating/non-obstructive hydrocephalus

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Causes: subarachnoid granule scarring after subarachnoid hemorrhage
    or meningitis (Cryptococcal), ependymoma producing excess CSF,
    venous sinus thrombosis

-   Safe to perform lumbar puncture

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-communicating/Obstructive Hydrocephalus

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Causes: tumor, abscess, or hematoma in the midline ventricular
    structures

-   Avoid lumbar punctures due to risk of herniation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Eventually, elevated ICP will cause brain herniation

Presentation

-   Headache (can be positional), blurred vision, visual field
    reduction, enlarged blind spot, nausea, vomiting, encephalopathy,
    syncope, coma

-   Sixth nerve palsies are common (inability for eye to look towards
    ipsilateral side)

-   Third nerve palsies (blown pupil) are classically associated with
    uncal herniation

Evaluation

-   Visual exam: visual fields, enlarged blind spot, papilledema (may
    not be present if very rapid ICP increase, even with vision loss),
    and CN6 nerve palsies

-   STAT head CT to look for midline shift, obstructions, and mass
    lesions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider Neurosurgery evaluation if obstructive lesion or concern
    for herniation (craniectomy vs resection vs evacuation vs
    ventricular drain)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CTV or MRV w/wo to look for venous sinus thrombosis (especially in
    pregnant pts)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Venous sinus thrombosis needs anticoagulation, even if there is some
    degree of hemorrhagic infarction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If no obstructive lesion, obtain lumbar puncture with opening
    pressure (elevated OP \> 20mmgHg)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If workup is otherwise normal, except for elevated opening pressure,
    this is suggestive of idiopathic intracranial hypertension

Management

-   Idiopathic intracranial hypertension

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acetazolamide and/or topiramate

-   Ophthalmology evaluation emergently for consideration of nerve
    sheath fenestrations or urgent ventriculoperitoneal shunt placement
    if severe disc edema

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If there is clinical concern for herniation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cushing Triad: vital sign changes in herniation, widened pulse
    pressure (increasing systolic, decreasing diastolic), bradycardia,
    and irregular respirations

-   Mannitol: 50g IV, can be given peripherally. Has risks of renal
    injury. Associated with initial increase in ICP, often given with
    furosemide to counter this.

-   Hypertonic saline: 3%, 7% or 23% saline can be given, needs central
    access for repeat administration but initial dose can be given via
    peripheral IV

-   Maintain head of bed at least 30° and loosen neck obstructions
    (c-collars) as able

-   Consider neurosurgery consult for shunt/external ventricular drain
    consideration

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hyperventilation can be done with goal PaCO2 30-34 mmHg or ETCO2
    20-30 mmHg but is only a temporizing measure and risks rebound edema

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   After 4-6h, compensatory pH changes in the blood prevent
    vasoconstrictive affects

Guillain-Barre Syndrome (GBS)

Background

-   Rapid-onset polyneuropathy that manifests most often with ascending
    weakness and numbness that can involve the respiratory and facial
    musculature

-   Usually preceded by infectious illness a few weeks prior
    (Campylobacter, CMV, Flu, HIV, etc)

-   Pts are much more likely to get GBS from an infection than any
    vaccine, weak vaccine links to GBS are an additional 1-2 cases per
    million flu vaccines

Presentation

-   Most common form is acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy
    (AIDP)

-   Progressive extremity weakness, weak or absent reflexes, and
    potentially subjective sensatory changes, especially back pain, with
    nadir being reached within 4 weeks

-   Sensory loss is common in an ascending pattern too

-   There are many variants of GBS

-   Miller-Fischer Syndrome: ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, areflexia

-   Bickerstaff brainstem encephalitis: encephalopathy, ophthalmoplegia,
    ataxia

-   Pure Sensory GBS: sensory loss with only mild motor involvement

-   Do not use lack of classic ascending weakness to dismiss the idea of
    GBS

Evaluation

-   LP: albuminocytologic dissociation = high protein with normal cell
    count

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   One exception is HIV, which can cause AIDP but also have a high cell
    count and high protein count

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   EMG/NCV: usually normal early in course, so typically performed at
    least 2 weeks after symptom onset

-   MRI L-Spine w/wo: Assess for spinal cord lesions, can demonstrate
    nerve root enhancement

-   Ddx: Spinal cord lesions, LEMS, MG, acute HIV or HCV, viral myelitis
    (enterovirus/WNV)

Management

-   ABCs! Then ensure adequate respiratory status with baseline NIF/VC,
    then Q4-6H

-   NIF \> -30 with good effort, generally warrants ICU monitoring

-   IVIG or PLEX

-   Avoid steroids as they can worsen symptoms

Myasthenia Gravis (MG) and Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome (LEMS)

Background

-   Disorders of the neuromuscular junction

-   MG affects the post-synaptic cleft at the acetylcholine receptor
    (fatigability worsens with use)

-   LEMS affects the pre-synaptic cleft at the calcium channels
    (fatigability improves with use)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Many cases are paraneoplastic (classically small cell lung
    carcinoma)

Presentation

-   Double vision, ptosis, dysarthria, dysphagia

-   Dyspnea looks different than in other conditions: air hunger,
    usually also with dysphagia

-   Initially, the pt may not look sick or distressed, but may have a
    short inspiratory time or difficulty speaking in complete sentences
    due to shallow breathing

-   Most pts have a known history of myasthenia, but up to 20% present
    initially with crisis

Evaluation

-   Physical exam

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Look closely for ptosis, nasal speech, weak neck flexion/extension
    (same nerve roots as diaphragm), interrupted speech to take extra
    breaths, holding upward gaze

-   These pts do not exhibit "huffing and puffing" like in COPD/asthma
    exacerbations

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pts with NMJ disease can go from talking to intubated within several
    hours!

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   LEMS: less ocular weakness but does have extremity weakness and
    absent reflexes that improve with muscle use (facilitation)

-   Pulmonary compromise is very rare in LEMS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   EMG/NCS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   MG: decremental response to repetitive stimulation

-   LEMS: increased amplitude in response to repetitive stimulation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Labs: myasthenia antibody panels (send prior to IVIG/PLEX being
    given)

-   Imaging: consider chest CT to look for thymic hyperplasia

Management

-   Monitor NIF (negative inspiratory force) at baseline and Q4H-Q8H

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Measure of diaphragmatic strength (more negative = more force)

-   Normal is more negative than -60

-   If more positive than -30, consider elective intubation

-   Note that pt effort will affect NIF values

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IVIG or PLEX

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Both have similar supportive evidence; IVIG is usually easier to do

-   PLEX has the risks you would expect with dialysis (e.g. fluid
    shifts) and coagulopathy

-   IVIG 🡪 check IgA levels. Can increase risk of DVT, has risk of
    aseptic meningitis and provides significant fluid load so not ideal
    for pts with CHF

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Steroids

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Usually up-titrated SLOWLY (by 10-20mg Prednisone daily)

-   Rapid increases in steroids can worsen pts with MG, so talk to
    Neurology before adjusting

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pyridostigmine

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Typically continue at their home dose

-   Too much pyridostigmine can make pts worse (more secretions), so for
    those doing poorly on \>90mg per dose, consider lowering the dose

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Treat underlying causes of exacerbations---usually infections or
    other toxic/metabolic insults

-   Remove/avoid exacerbating medications: Fluoroquinolones,
    aminoglycosides, beta blockers, Mg. There are many medications to
    avoid. Please refer to UpToDate for more thorough list.

-   LEMS specific management:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   3,4-Diaminopyridine

-   Can respond to IVIG or Pyridostigmine

-   Workup for underlying neoplasm

Status Epilepticus

Background

-   Either a single seizure \>5 minutes or ≥2 seizures without a return
    to baseline in between

-   Differentiating convulsive seizures from non-epileptic events
    ("pseudoseizure"): See "Seizure without Status Epilepticus" chapter

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Features that suggest non-epileptic/psychogenic event include
    moaning or talking throughout the event, "no-no" head shake,
    repetitive movements of opposing muscle groups, very arrhythmic or
    purposeful-looking movements, or seizures that have been ongoing for
    "hours"

    Evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fingerstick glucose, BMP/CBC, and UDS

-   Consult Neurology

-   EEG (start with 2hr) to determine if it is seizure or not and for
    titration of medications

-   Consider a non-contrasted head CT. MRI cannot be obtained while EEG
    is attached

-   Up to half of pts presenting in status epilepticus have no history
    of seizure, so they need urgent head imaging, consideration for
    lumbar puncture, infectious and toxic workup, tox screen, and
    sometimes rheumatologic or paraneoplastic workup

-   If history of seizure or on antiseizure medications (ASMs) obtain
    trough levels

Management

-   ABCs! Start with benzos:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   2 mg lorazepam IV then repeat q1-3 minutes up to 0.1 mg/kg OR

-   5 mg of diazepam IV every minute (takes longer to give diazepam so
    would give concurrent ASM) OR

-   10 mg IM midazolam if no IV access

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   After 2 rounds of benzos, would shift to anti-seizure medications if
    still in status (neurology should be contacted here if not already):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IV fosphenytoin 20 mgPE/kg

-   IV levetiracetam 60 mg/kg (up to 4.5g max)

-   IV valproic acid 40 mg/kg

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If still seizing at this point, the pt will likely need intubation

-   These pts MUST be placed on EEG if they get paralyzed or sedated
    because convulsive status often continues as nonconvulsive status,
    which still damages the brain.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If still seizing, pts should be on midazolam, Propofol, or
    barbiturate infusions

-   Focal seizures, such as arm or face twitching with retained
    awareness do not always need to be treated to the point of
    initiating coma

Stroke

Background

-   Preferred term: stroke (CVA is like saying heart attack instead of
    STEMI)

-   Sudden onset, focal (usually unilateral) neurologic deficits:
    Weakness, sensory loss, vision loss, ataxia/unsteadiness, vertigo,
    double vision, facial droop, dysarthria, aphasia

-   Differential

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stroke (ischemic or hemorrhagic)

-   Seizure or post-ictal paralysis

-   Headache phenomena (complex migraine)

-   Cervical spinal cord lesions, though these more commonly cause
    bilateral symptoms

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stroke-like symptoms can also develop as recrudescence--previous
    stroke or brain lesion symptoms worsening with systemic toxic,
    metabolic, infectious processes or hypotension

Evaluation

-   Critical decision-making information: Last time pt was SEEN
    neurologically normal (last known normal - LKN), time symptoms first
    observed, anticoagulation status, recent surgeries, history of
    bleeding (severe GIB or ICH), recent medications, blood pressure,
    blood sugar, platelet count, and baseline neuro exam

-   **If symptoms developed with LKN within 24 hours, then call a Stroke
    Alert**! Purpose of Stroke Alert is to work pt up for acute
    treatment (thrombolytics and thrombectomy).

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   VUMC: Call 11111 and tell the operator stroke alert and current pt
    location

-   NAVA: Dial 911 from a VA landline and tell them you want to call a
    Stroke Alert. Use Stroke Orderset and order a CTH/CTA H/N. Consult
    and STAT page Neurology residents at 835-5137. Call National
    Tele-Stroke Provider (469-627-4790), who will run the alert with
    Neurology residents assisting if possible.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If \< 24 hours, can request Neuro Alert instead**.** Look for Neuro
    Alert under Orders in Epic. Neurology will determine if it should be
    escalated to a Stroke Alert.

-   STAT CT Head/CTA/CTP for consideration of TNK or endovascular
    therapy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If renal function is abnormal, discuss with neurology

-   MRI/MRA is an option but takes longer (MRAs are also better with
    Gadolinium)

-   Neurology service should be leading this portion

    Management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Blood pressure goals

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ischemic Stroke

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In general, aim for SBP 110-220, avoiding anti-hypertensives and
    hypotension

-   Pts with intracranial atherosclerosis may require higher BP to
    maintain perfusion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hemorrhagic Stroke

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In general, SBP 130-150 but no need to press if running less

-   These pts are managed in Neuro ICU

-   Reverse coagulopathies and keep platelets \> 100,000

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Q1H neuro checks

-   EKG/telemetry

-   TTE with Contrast to assess for intracardiac thrombus/PFO

-   A1c with goal \<7.0%

-   LDL with goal \<70

    ![](media/image27.tiff){width="3.671009405074366in"
    height="4.5887631233595805in"}

Ophthalmology

Editor and Author: Jonathan A. Barnett, MD

Reviewed by John B. Bond III, MD

Common Abbreviations in Ophthalmology

-   OD = Right eye \| OS = Left eye \| OU = Both eyes

-   VA = Visual Acuity \| VAcc = with correction \[glasses or contact
    lenses\] \| VAsc = without correction

-   PH = Pinhole acuity

-   PHNI = No Improvement of vision with a pinhole

-   Gtt = drop

-   Ung = ointment

-   EOM = Extraocular Muscles

-   IOP = Intraocular Pressure

-   CVF = Confrontational Visual Fields

-   CF = Count Fingers

-   HM = Hand Motion

-   DFE = Dilated Fundus Exam \| SLE = Slit Lamp Exam \| PLE = Pen Light
    Exam

-   RAPD = Relative Afferent Pupillary Defect

-   KED = corneal epithelial defect (i.e., abrasion)

-   PEE / SPK = corneal punctate epithelial erosions / superficial
    punctate keratopathy

-   FBS = Foreign body sensation

-   PFATs = Preservative-Free Artificial Tears

-   SCH = Subconjunctival hemorrhage

-   DD = Disc Diameters in size

-   W&q = Conjunctiva is white and quiet (normal)

-   D&q = Anterior chamber is deep and quiet (normal, without
    inflammation)

-   AC = Anterior Chamber

-   ON = Optic Nerve \| ONH = Optic Nerve Head

-   RD = Retinal Detachment

-   PVD = Posterior Vitreous Detachment

-   DR = Diabetic Retinopathy \| NPDR: Nonproliferative DR \| PDR:
    Proliferative DR

-   CNV = Choroidal Neovascularization

-   NVI = Neovascularization of the Iris \| NVA = Neovascularization of
    the Angle \| NVD = Neovascularization of the optic Disc \| NVE =
    Neovascularization elsewhere (usually peripheral retina)

-   CE/IOL = Cataract Extraction with IntraOcular Lens insertion (i.e.,
    cataract surgery)

-   IV = Intravitreal (as usually in "IV injection")

Taking a Good Ocular History

History of Present Illness:

-   Duration, onset, and timing of visual or eye symptoms

-   Presence of pain, and if yes, describe severity and quality

-   Duration of symptoms: constant or intermittent

-   History of similar presentation."Has this happened to you before?"

-   Ocular symptoms: flashes, floaters, curtain, or veils coming down in
    your field of vision

-   Associated systemic symptoms: nausea, vomiting, fever, chills,
    headache, neuro deficits

Past Ocular History:

-   Do you wear glasses? For distance or reading or both? Contact
    lenses?

-   When was the last time you saw an eye doctor?

-   History of eye surgeries

-   History of any other eye conditions: cataracts, glaucoma, macular
    degeneration, diabetic retinopathy

Family History: family history of any eye diseases as above

Social History: tobacco, alcohol, or other illicit drugs

Approach to Blurry Vision

![A picture containing text Description automatically
generated](media/image28.png){width="3.5351574803149606in"
height="2.5274726596675414in"}

Key Points:

-   This flowchart is meant to serve as a guide. Bear in mind that there
    are always exceptions

-   Many ocular problems are not urgent and can be dealt with outpt.
    Assessing the acuity of onset is the first step

-   The top differential for blurry vision is dry eye, cataract, or
    uncorrected refractive error

-   If the symptoms are acute and just in one eye, it is more likely to
    be ocular and warrants further investigation (likely ophthalmology
    consult)

Approach to Double Vision (Diplopia)

![Diagram Description automatically
generated](media/image29.png){width="3.556003937007874in"
height="1.6574956255468067in"}

Key Points

-   This flowchart is meant to serve as a guide. Bear in mind that there
    are always exceptions

-   Most important question to ask with any pt complaining of double
    vision is whether it goes away when covering one eye. If it does,
    then it is an ocular misalignment issue (= true binocular diplopia)

-   If the diplopia is acute and constant, this requires more urgent
    evaluation than if intermittent.

-   Look at the pupil and eye movements:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If the eye is dilated ("blown pupil"), abducted and infraducted
    ("down and out position"), and ptotic, this is classic for a
    complete CN3 palsy and requires immediate neuroimaging (e.g. CTA
    head) to rule out an enlarging aneurysm

Approach to Flashes, Floaters, Spots

![Diagram Description automatically
generated](media/image30.png){width="3.5065529308836396in"
height="1.464309930008749in"}

Key Points

-   This flowchart is meant to serve as a guide. Bear in mind that there
    are always exceptions

-   Scintillating or colorful lights/spots, especially if bilateral, are
    likely migrainous in nature.

-   A pt may say they see a visual disturbance in the left eye, when in
    reality it is in the left visual field of both eyes (indicating that
    it is a neurological issue, e.g., migraine). Ask if the pt has tried
    closing one eye to see if the visual phenomenon is actually in one
    eye.

-   Rapid onset of floaters, often preceded by a peripheral
    crescent-shaped light flash, is classic for posterior vitreous
    detachment. A black curtain or veil that comes down in the vision is
    classic for retinal detachment

Approach to a Red Eye

When the conjunctiva is vasodilated, or "injected," the eye looks red.
The more inflamed the conjunctiva, the angrier-looking the eye

Differential

-   Dry Eye

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Trace diffuse injection, blurry vision that fluctuates, gritty
    sensation, clears with blinking

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Corneal abrasion, ulceration, or exposure keratopathy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Unilateral, moderate to severe injection, may be diffuse or
    sectoral, pain, blurry vision, mucus discharge, history of poor
    blink rate, intubated/sedated status.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Subconjunctival hemorrhage

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Patch of bright red, often with sharp borders. Due to rupture of
    conjunctival vessel. Whole conjunctiva can be involved and may be
    bright red. Looks scarier than it is. Common in pts on
    anticoagulation or after a Valsalva maneuvers. Will resolve
    spontaneously

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Allergic conjunctivitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Chemosis, mild to moderate injection, blurry vision, very itchy,
    watery discharge, hx of allergies/atopy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Viral or bacterial conjunctivitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Moderate to severe injection, scattered subconjunctival hemorrhages
    or petechiae, itchy or burning/painful eyes. If viral, look for
    preauricular adenopathy or recent URI

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute angle closure glaucoma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Severe eye pain with nausea/vomiting, rock-hard eye, mid-dilated and
    fixed pupil, blurry vision

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Uveitis, episcleritis, scleritis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Eye pain, perilimbal injection ("ciliary flush"), blurry vision, may
    have history of autoimmune disease. Episcleritis vs scleritis can be
    difficult to discern. Scleritis may have a deeper, violaceous hue

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Endophthalmitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Eye pain, history of trauma or eye surgery, severe vision loss,
    history of immunocompromise and systemic infection (if endogenous)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Carotid-cavernous fistula

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Engorged and tortuous conjunctival vessels, recent history of
    trauma, resistance to retropulsion (pushing the globe back in)

Anisocoria

Background

-   Anisocoria: unequal pupil size

-   Physiological anisocoria: Pupil sizes differ by \<1mm.

-   Constriction of the pupil is driven by parasympathetic innervation;
    dilation by sympathetic innervation

Conditions that can cause anisocoria

-   Benign episodic mydriasis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Intermittent episodes of pupillary dilation and possible association
    with migraine. No other significant neurologic or ocular symptoms
    present. Important to exclude other causes of mydriasis prior to
    this diagnosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Horner's syndrome

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pupillary miosis + ipsilateral upper lid ptosis

-   May be congenital or acquired

-   Acquired causes include trauma involving sympathetic pathway,
    carotid dissection, cavernous sinus pathology, stroke, neck or
    thoracic surgery, or Pancoast / mediastinal tumor (rare).

-   If suspect new onset Horner's, consider Neurology and Ophthalmology
    consult.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CN3 Palsy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pupillary mydriasis ("blown pupil") + adduction, supraduction,
    infraduction deficit, "down and out position", upper lid ptosis.
    Must rule out a compressive lesion on CN3

-   If new onset, consider head imaging and Neurology and Ophthalmology
    consult

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Medications (especially anticholinergics)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Commonly seen in young pts with scopolamine patches who forget to
    wash hands after handling the patch; dilation can last one day to a
    couple weeks

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Trauma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Damage to the iris sphincter after eye trauma can cause a dilated
    pupil that is poorly reactive to light

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Eye surgery

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pts who have undergone intraocular surgery (like cataract surgery)
    may have an irregularly shaped, less reactive, and slightly dilated
    pupil as compared to the other eye due to damage or stretching of
    the iris during the operation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infections

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Viral infections and syphilis can cause parasympathetic denervation,
    resulting in a relatively mydriatic pupil that is poorly reactive to
    light. However, the accommodative pupillary response (i.e.,
    constriction at focusing on an object at near) may be intact

-   "Adie's Tonic Pupil": Idiopathic cause of parasympathetic
    denervation presenting similarly as above. Viruses (HSV) are
    sometimes thought to be behind idiopathic cases.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute angle closure glaucoma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   During an acute attack, the pupil may be mid-dilated and sluggish to
    light. However, pts will also have symptoms of acute angle closure
    (e.g. headaches, nausea/vomiting, eye pain, etc. See Glaucoma
    section for more info)

Conjunctivitis

Background and Presentation

-   Allergic, viral, or bacterial cause

-   All forms present with red and irritated conjunctiva

-   In practice it can be difficult to distinguish between the types of
    conjunctivitis.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Allergic: Hx of allergies/atopy, bilateral, chemosis, watery/mucoid
    discharge, itchiness predominant symptom

-   Viral: Hx of recent URI or exposure, unilateral first then
    bilateral, itchy/burning, subconjunctival hemorrhages or petechiae,
    watery/mucoid discharge, tender preauricular lymph nodes

-   Bacterial: Itching less prominent. Burning, aching, and stabbing
    discomfort predominates. Unilateral first then bilateral.
    Mucoid/purulent discharge (and more copious)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Blurry vision is common, but loss of vision should not occur if
    disease limited to conjunctiva

Management:

-   Allergic: eliminate allergen, artificial tears,
    antihistamine/mast-cell stabilizer drops (olopatadine, ketotifen),
    oral antihistamine (diphenhydramine, loratadine)

-   Viral: 4-8x/day artificial tears, cold compresses, isolation
    precautions

-   Bacterial: culture/swab the ocular discharge, isolation precautions,
    moxifloxacin drops (Vigamox) QID or trimethoprim/polymyxin B
    drops/ointment for 5-7 days

-   Consult Ophthalmology if concern for worsening

Cataracts

Background

-   Opacification of the eye's natural lens

-   Primary cause is normal aging, occurs bilaterally and symmetrically

-   Other causes include congenital, trauma, and meds (esp chronic /
    long-term steroid use)

Presentation

-   Most common symptoms include progressive decreased vision over
    years, increased glare, increased difficulty with night vision

Evaluation and Management

-   Unless the cataracts are dense enough, it is difficult to appreciate
    without a slit lamp exam

-   Place an outpt ophthalmology referral

Corneal Abrasion, Exposure Keratopathy, Ulceration

Background

-   Corneal abrasion = corneal epithelial defect (KED): An area of
    missing corneal epithelium. This is akin to a scratch on the skin.
    Most common causes include trauma, excessive surface dryness,
    infection, and neurotrophic disease

-   Exposure keratopathy: Development of corneal epithelial defects
    secondary to incomplete closure of the eyelids (e.g. prolonged
    exposure of the cornea to air). Most often occurs in pts who are
    intubated/sedated, have poor orbicularis tone/paralysis (Bell
    palsy), or have abnormal blink rate (e.g. Parkinson's)

-   Corneal ulceration: The injury extends past the corneal epithelium
    and 'ulcerates' into the underlying stroma. Ulcerations are often
    infectious and develop after untreated abrasions (abrasions are
    essentially open wounds). In rare cases ulcerations can also be
    sterile (autoimmune/inflammatory).

Presentation and Evaluation

-   Abrasions and ulcerations are often extremely painful. May be
    exacerbated by blinking

-   Conjunctival injection; but sometimes the eye can appear normal, or
    only have trace redness, and the pain may seem out of proportion to
    external appearance

-   Mucus discharge and crusting

-   Photophobia and tearing

-   Blurry vision

-   Ulcerations will present with the above, but also have a whitish
    infiltrate in the cornea. The conjunctival injection and discharge
    will often be a lot worse

-   1 drop of Proparacaine 0.5% will improve pain

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Note: Proparacaine is used only for diagnostic, and not therapeutic,
    purposes. Do not administer proparacaine on a scheduled or PRN basis
    for pain. The duration of action is only 15 minutes, and repeated
    chronic use can lead to corneal melt/ulceration

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   1 drop of fluorescein followed by shining a blue light (or Wood's
    lamp) will reveal the KED

Management

-   VUMC Perioperative Corneal Abrasion Protocol

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If pt is recently postop or underwent recent extubation and presents
    with eye pain/burning, blurry vision, redness, photophobia, VUMC has
    a periop corneal abrasion protocol (does not require ophthalmology
    consult)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Erythromycin ophthalmic ointment TID into the lower fornix of eye x5
    days

-   If the pain and redness do not improve within 48 hours, then consult
    ophthalmology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Corneal abrasion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can try erythromycin ophthalmic ointment TID as above

-   If the pain and redness do not improve within 48 hours, or have
    other concerns, consult Ophthalmology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Exposure keratopathy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If pt is intubated and sedated, or cannot otherwise fully close
    his/her eyes, take the following measures to prevent development of
    corneal abrasion or ulceration:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Moisture chambers (aka bubble shields) to eyes at all times

-   Copious amount of lubricating ophthalmic ointment (e.g., Lubrifresh)
    in eyes TID

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Corneal ulceration

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If you see whitish material in the cornea itself, this is likely a
    corneal ulceration and warrants an Ophthalmology consult

Dry Eye

Background

-   Most common ocular complaint, especially amongst pts admitted to the
    hospital

-   Due to insufficient tear production and/or imbalance of components
    that make up tear film

-   Etiology is vast and can include aging, eye strain/overuse, contact
    lens use, systemic and topical medications, post eye surgery,
    nutritional deficiencies, autoimmune disease, or concomitant with
    other ocular conditions

Presentation

-   Blurry vision bilaterally that comes and goes (very common--if the
    pt complains of fluctuating blurriness, dry eye should be at the top
    of your differential)

-   Excessive tearing or watery eyes

-   Stinging, burning, soreness, discomfort, gritty, or foreign body
    sensation

-   Discomfort with eye movements

-   Trace/mild conjunctival injection

Evaluation and Management

-   Schedule preservative-free (PF) artificial tears at least 4x/day and
    lubricating eye ointment at bedtime to see if the pt\'s symptoms
    improve.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Polyvinyl alcohol-povidone PF (Refresh Classic)

-   Lubricating ophthalmic ointment (Lubrifresh)

-   Do not order PRN. Pts will not ask.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If a pt\'s symptoms fail to improve or worsen on artificial tears,
    consider paging ophthalmology for additional assistance. If there is
    no apparent imminent threat to vision, you can place an
    ophthalmology outpt referral upon discharge

Fungemia and Intraocular Involvement

The American Academy of Ophthalmology currently does NOT recommend
routine Ophthalmology consults for visually asymptomatic pts with
systemic candidemia. The incidence of candidemia-related endophthalmitis
detected from routine screenings is \<1%

By contrast, if the pt has visual symptoms, an Ophthalmology consult is
warranted.

-   Breazzano MP et al. American Academy of Ophthalmology
    Recommendations on Screening for Endogenous Candida Endophthalmitis.
    Ophthalmology. 2022 Jan;129(1):73-76

Glaucoma

Background

-   Glaucoma is a disease of the optic nerve that follows a
    characteristic pattern of optic nerve fiber degeneration

-   High intraocular pressure (IOP) is believed to be the main etiology
    of the disease

-   While the "normal" IOP range is between 11 and 21 mmHg, there are
    individuals who have a pressure above 21 that do not develop
    glaucoma. Conversely, there are individuals who have a pressure in
    the normal range that DO develop glaucoma (= Normal Tension
    Glaucoma)

-   Aqueous humor fills the anterior chamber and drains through a
    sieve-like structure called the trabecular meshwork (TM), located in
    the angle between the iris and the cornea. After passing through TM,
    aqueous drains into the eye's venous system. Impediment to aqueous
    flow will cause elevated IOP

Presentation

-   All glaucomas generally cause progressive peripheral visual field
    loss that ultimately encroaches on central fixation and leads to
    irreversible blindness if left untreated

-   A glaucomatous optic nerve is often described as "cupped"

-   Presents in an acute or chronic fashion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute angle-closure glaucoma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The iridocorneal angle rapidly closes, blocking aqueous drainage and
    causing a sudden rise in IOP (usually \>40 mmHg)

-   Signs and symptoms: Intense eye or orbital pain, headache,
    nausea/vomiting, blurred vision, halos around lights, fixed and
    mid-dilated pupil, rock-hard eye, conjunctival redness, cloudy
    cornea

-   Usually unilateral, but occasionally can be bilateral

-   Classic trigger is a pupil-dilating factor (e.g. dark environment or
    anticholinergic medications) in a person with anatomically narrow
    angles

-   If IOP is not lowered within hours, permanent optic nerve damage and
    vision loss will likely occur

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Primary open angle glaucoma (POAG)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most common glaucoma in the US

-   The iridocorneal angle is open, but due to inadequately functioning
    TM (or other mechanism) aqueous does not drain properly and IOP is
    chronically elevated.

-   Often painless and without noticeable vision changes in the early
    stage of disease. Individuals can go undiagnosed for years, sitting
    at an IOP of say 30 mmHg, without being aware they are losing vision
    until the vision loss is severe

Evaluation and Management

-   Primary open angle

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Continue the pt's home glaucoma drops; caution if they develop a
    medical condition that results in a contraindication (See table
    below)

-   Pro tip: Often pts will remember the cap color of drops, but not the
    names

+-----------+------+-----------+------+------------+-----------------+
| Name      | Cap  | Class     | Do   | Possible   | Relative        |
| (brand)   | c    |           | sing | side       | co              |
|           | olor |           |      | effects    | ntraindications |
+===========+======+===========+======+============+=================+
| Timolol   | Ye   | Non       | BID  | Br         | Heart           |
| (         | llow | selective |      | adycardia, | conditions      |
| Timoptic) |      | bet       |      | bro        | (CHF, heart     |
|           |      | a-blocker |      | nchospasm, | block),         |
|           |      |           |      | h          | asthma/COPD     |
|           |      |           |      | ypotension |                 |
+-----------+------+-----------+------+------------+-----------------+
| La        | Teal | Pros      | QHS  | Flulike    | Pregnancy       |
| tanoprost |      | taglandin |      | symptoms,  | (category C),   |
|           |      | analogue  |      | joint      | uveitis         |
| (Xalatan) |      |           |      | pains      |                 |
+-----------+------+-----------+------+------------+-----------------+
| Br        | Pu   | Alpha-2   | BID  | Allergic   | Infants and     |
| imonidine | rple | agonist   | -TID | conju      | young children  |
|           |      |           |      | nctivitis, |                 |
| (         |      |           |      | CNS        |                 |
| Alphagan) |      |           |      | d          |                 |
|           |      |           |      | epression, |                 |
|           |      |           |      | b          |                 |
|           |      |           |      | radycardia |                 |
+-----------+------+-----------+------+------------+-----------------+
| Do        | Or   | Carbonic  | BID  | Acidosis,  | Renal           |
| rzolamide | ange | anhydrase |      | hy         | insufficiency,  |
|           |      | inhibitor |      | pokalemia, | Hepatic         |
| (Trusopt) |      |           |      | malaise,   | cirrhosis,      |
|           |      |           |      | GI upset,  | Sickle cell     |
|           |      |           |      | metallic   | disease,        |
|           |      |           |      | taste      | caution when    |
|           |      |           |      |            | using with      |
|           |      |           |      |            | other K-wasting |
|           |      |           |      |            | drugs           |
+-----------+------+-----------+------+------------+-----------------+
| Acet      | PO   | Carbonic  | 2    | Same as    | Same as         |
| azolamide | ta   | anhydrase | 50mg | do         | dorzolamide,    |
|           | blet | inhibitor |      | rzolamide, | but side        |
| (Diamox)  |      |           | BID  | but side   | effects more    |
| PO        |      |           | -QID | effects    | likely to occur |
|           |      |           |      | more       | given PO        |
|           |      |           |      | likely to  |                 |
|           |      |           |      | occur      |                 |
|           |      |           |      | given PO   |                 |
+-----------+------+-----------+------+------------+-----------------+

Cosopt (Blue cap) = dorzolamide + timolol

Combigan (Purple cap) = brimonidine + timolol

-   Acute Angle Closure:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If concerned for acute angle closure, consult Ophthalmology ASAP

-   The goal is to lower the IOP ASAP. Target \<30 mmHg

-   Administer frequent rotating rounds of all the IOP-lowering drops: 1
    drop of Cosopt (then wait 5 minutes), followed by Brimonidine (then
    wait 5 minutes), followed by Latanoprost (then wait 5
    minutes)\--then keep repeating the cycle until the IOP goes down

-   Concurrently, administer one dose of IV Diamox 500mg if not
    contraindicated (e.g., renal insufficiency or hepatic cirrhosis).
    Ophthalmology will recheck the IOP every hour or so to ensure that
    the IOP is responding (usually it does)

-   If the IOP does not respond, pt will need a bedside AC tap to
    offload aqueous and lower the pressure

-   Pt should ultimately get a Laser Peripheral Iridotomy (LPI) to avoid
    future angle-closure attacks, which is typically performed as an
    outpt procedure

Optic Neuritis

Background

-   Inflammation of the optic nerve often caused by demyelinating
    disease (e.g. multiple sclerosis). Less often, can be caused by
    infection (viral etiology, bartonella, Lyme, syphilis, TB,
    toxoplasmosis) or infiltrative process (e.g., sarcoidosis,
    malignancy)

Presentation

-   Scotoma, constant blurry vision or blurred spot, pain with eye
    movements, along with other systemic neurologic symptoms (if
    demyelinating process)

-   If pt is of age 20s-40s and female, autoimmune/demyelinating disease
    is at top of the differential. If pt is older, consider other causes

-   If pt is immunocompromised, infectious etiology becomes more likely.

Evaluation

-   Consult both ophthalmology and neurology if concerned for an optic
    neuritis

-   MRI brain and orbits with and without contrast, thin slices, fat
    suppression

-   If no contraindications to imaging, obtain LP with CSF studies
    (glucose, protein, cell count, Gram stain, bacterial/viral cultures,
    RPR/VDRL, oligos, consider NMO/AQP4)

Management

-   High dose IV methylprednisolone

-   If vision continues to worsen and/or presence of other systemic
    neurologic symptoms despite steroid treatment, consider escalation
    to PLEX therapy with assistance of neurology

Orbital vs Preseptal Cellulitis

Background

-   The septum is a fibrous, membranous structure that divides the
    anterior and posterior orbit.

-   Preseptal cellulitis: Infection is bound anterior to the septum

-   Orbital cellulitis (AKA postseptal cellulitis): infection extends
    posterior to the septum

-   Common risk factors/etiologies: URI, acute or chronic sinusitis,
    trauma, tooth abscess, stye or other local/adjacent skin infection
    or condition, local or adjacent bug bite, immunocompromised state,
    underlying systemic infection

-   Often bacterial cause (gram positive Staph or Strep species, and/or
    gram negative anaerobic species like Peptococcus or Bacteroides).
    Consider fungal infection (Aspergillus, Mucor) in immunocompromised
    or diabetic pts\
    \
    Presentation

+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+
| Preseptal Cellulitis | Can be Present in    | Orbital Cellulitis    |
|                      | Either               |                       |
+======================+======================+=======================+
| -Pt less toxic       | -Erythema and Edema  | -Pt more toxic        |
| appearing            | of eyelids (upper    | appearing             |
|                      | and/or lower) and    |                       |
| No visual compromise | periorbital skin     | -Pain with eye        |
|                      |                      | movements             |
| -Mild conjunctival   | -Fever (although     |                       |
| injection, no to     | more likely in       | -Limitation of eye    |
| minimal chemosis     | Orbital cellulitis)  | movements +/-         |
|                      |                      | diplopia              |
| -No or minimal       | -Difficulty opening  |                       |
| limitation of eye    | the eye d/t swelling | -Proptosis            |
| movements            |                      |                       |
|                      | -Blurry vision       | -Severe conjunctival  |
| -No or minimal       |                      | injection + chemosis  |
| proptosis            | -Tearing/ocular      |                       |
|                      | discharge            | -Vision may be        |
| -Symptoms improving  |                      | compromised           |
| with PO antibiotics  |                      |                       |
|                      |                      | -Symptoms not         |
|                      |                      | improving after       |
|                      |                      | course of PO          |
|                      |                      | antibiotics           |
+----------------------+----------------------+-----------------------+

Evaluation

-   Vital signs

-   Labs: CBC, CMP, ESR, CRP, blood cultures, wound culture if any open
    draining areas

-   Imaging: CT orbits with and without contrast

-   Daily or BID photographs to track progression

-   You can use the LRINEC scale to help assess whether the infection is
    necrotizing:

    https://www.mdcalc.com/lrinec-score-necrotizing-soft-tissue-infection.

Management

-   Necrotizing soft tissue infections should be addressed immediately
    and undergo surgical debridement ASAP

-   Preseptal cellulitis can usually be managed on an outpt basis with
    PO antibiotics (e.g. augmentin) with close follow-up

-   If condition is worsening, if there is failure to improve on PO
    antibiotics, or if concerned for postseptal extension (i.e. that the
    preseptal cellulitis has evolved into an orbital cellulitis),
    management generally includes:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IV broad spectrum antibiotics (usually Unasyn + vancomycin to start
    if no intracranial extension; could also do vancomycin +
    ceftriaxone + flagyl)

-   Ophthalmology consult

-   Consider ID consult

-   Consider ENT consult if concomitant sinus disease (most of the time
    there is)

-   Consider OMFS consult if suspect etiology is odontogenic

-   Tobradex eye drops QID to affected eye

-   Nasal toilet (afrin, flonase, nasal saline)---usually dictated by
    ENT

-   Warm compresses at least QID to affected eye

-   Trend daily CRP

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If there is failure to improve, a large orbital abscess, optic nerve
    stretch on CT scan, evidence of necrotizing infection, or visual
    compromise, surgical drainage may be necessary.

Papilledema

Background

-   Edema of the optic nerve due to increased intracranial pressure

-   Ophthalmology is often consulted to rule out papilledema in pts who
    fit the "Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension (IIH)" profile, or
    with pts with other reasons for high ICP

Presentation

-   Symptoms of increased ICP: headaches that vary with position (often
    worse with bending over), nausea, vomiting, neck
    stiffness/meningismus, pulsatile tinnitus, fevers/chills

-   Visual symptoms: transient visual obscurations, dimming of vision,
    blurry vision, loss of color vision/red desaturation, loss of
    peripheral vision, scotoma

Evaluation and Management

-   Consult Ophthalmology and Neurology if concerned for papilledema.
    Neurosurgery should be involved if there is concern for shunt
    failure or other neurosurgical problem.

-   Ophthalmology / Neurology will advise on what imaging to order
    (usually MRI / MRV brain with and without contrast, + MRI Orbits
    with and without contrast and fat suppression)

-   If no contraindications after imaging, obtain LP with opening
    pressure, with CSF sent for cells, protein, glucose, and
    infectious/neoplastic workup where appropriate

-   Ophthalmology / Neurology may recommend PO or IV acetazolamide

Retinal Detachment and Posterior Vitreous Detachment

Background

-   Retinal detachment (RD): Detachment of retinal tissue from the back
    of the eye. Risk factors include trauma, high myopia
    (nearsightedness), older age, history of RD in the other eye, prior
    eye surgery, and family history

-   Posterior Vitreous Detachment (PVD): Detachment of vitreous from the
    retina. PVDs eventually will happen to all adults as the vitreous
    liquefies and shrivels with age. Some are asymptomatic

-   PVDs can lead to RDs, but not always. As the vitreous peels away
    from the underlying retina, vitreous can pull a piece of retina with
    it, causing a retinal tear. The retinal tear, if not treated, can
    evolve into an RD.

Presentation and Evaluation

-   Both can present with acute flashes and floaters

-   However, RDs will often present with a black curtain or veil that
    comes down somewhere in the pt's field of vision. PVDs may result in
    blurriness, but will not present with veils, scotomas, or severe
    loss of vision

Management

-   If pt presents with acute flashes, floaters, and/or black curtains
    in field of vision in one eye, consult ophthalmology

-   If not acute, or if symptoms occur in both eyes simultaneously,
    chances are this is not a PVD or an RD. See "Approach to Flashes,
    Floaters, Spots" section

Uveitis (includes Iritis, Cyclitis, Retinitis, Choroiditis)

Background

-   Uveitis: Inflammation of either or all of these structures. However,
    "uveitis" is a bit of a misnomer, since it is used to denote
    inflammation of any ocular component

-   Uveitis is usually associated with autoimmune conditions, less
    commonly with infections

+--------+------------+------------+---------------+----------------+
|        | Anterior   | In         | Posterior     | Panuveitis     |
|        | Uveitis    | termediate | Uveitis       |                |
|        |            | Uveitis    |               |                |
+========+============+============+===============+================+
| Pra    | Iritis     | Pars       | Retinitis,    | Diffuse        |
| ctical |            | planitis,  | Choroiditis,  | uveitis        |
| sy     |            | Cyclitis   | Ch            |                |
| nonyms |            |            | orioretinitis |                |
+--------+------------+------------+---------------+----------------+
| Defi   | In         | In         | Inflammation  | Inflammation   |
| nition | flammation | flammation | localized to  | involving the  |
|        | localized  | localized  | choroid and   | anterior,      |
|        | to the     | to the     | retina        | intermediate,  |
|        | anterior   | vitreous   |               | and posterior  |
|        | segment    | cavity and |               | structures     |
|        |            | pars plana |               |                |
+--------+------------+------------+---------------+----------------+
| Sy     | Vision     | Vision     | Vision loss   | Vision loss    |
| mptoms | loss       | loss       |               |                |
|        |            |            | Pain varies   | Pain varies    |
|        | Usually    | Pain       |               |                |
|        | painful    | varies     |               |                |
|        |            |            |               |                |
|        | Perilimbal |            |               |                |
|        | redness    |            |               |                |
+--------+------------+------------+---------------+----------------+
| Common | Idiopathic | Spillover  | Immu          | Lymphoma       |
| etio   |            | from       | nocompromised |                |
| logies | HLA-B27    | anterior   | (HIV,         | Behcet's       |
|        |            | uveitis    | transplant)   | disease        |
|        | IBD,       |            |               |                |
|        | psoriatic  | Multiple   | CMV, HSV, VZV | Sarcoid        |
|        | arthritis, | sclerosis  |               |                |
|        | ankylosing |            | Vasculitis    | Syphilis       |
|        | sp         | Lymphoma   |               |                |
|        | ondylitis, |            | Sarcoidosis   | TB             |
|        | reactive   | Sarcoid    |               |                |
|        | arthritis  |            | Toxoplasmosis | Toxoplasmosis  |
|        |            | Syphilis   |               |                |
|        |            |            | Syphilis      |                |
|        |            | TB         |               |                |
|        |            |            | TB            |                |
+--------+------------+------------+---------------+----------------+

Management

-   If you suspect a pt has uveitis, consult ophthalmology for
    evaluation

-   Pts with any of the above associated systemic conditions (e.g., IBD)
    do not need an inpt Ophthalmology consult unless the pt has visual
    symptoms. Referral to outpt Ophthalmology is appropriate for routine
    screening

Wilson's Disease: Ophthalmic Manifestations

-   The two classic ophthalmic manifestations of Wilson's disease are
    the "Kayser-Fleischer ring" (copper deposition around the corneal
    limbus) and the "Sunflower cataract" (copper deposition in the lens)

-   Wilson's disease rarely affects vision (unless the sunflower
    cataract is very advanced)

-   Unless the disease is very advanced and/or has been present for
    years, it is impossible for one to detect subtle copper deposition
    in the cornea, iridocorneal angle, or lens without an office-based
    slit lamp exam and gonioscopy (only available in the outpt setting)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The presence or absence of a Kayser-Fleischer ring does not rule in
    or rule out the disease

-   Testing for decreased ceruloplasmin, urinary copper levels, and
    genetic testing are more effective diagnostic methods

    If concerned about the visual impact of a developing sunflower
    cataract, an outpt ophthalmology referral is appropriate

Outpatient Medicine

Editors: Lauren Waskowicz, MD

Reviewed by: Jennifer K. Green, MD, MPH

Allergy - Lindsey Creech

Anaphylaxis

-   Sudden onset of signs and symptoms, usually in more than one body
    system, within minutes to a few hours of exposure to a trigger

-   Most common s/s are cutaneous (eg, sudden onset of generalized
    urticaria, angioedema, flushing, pruritus) \[Note: 10 to 20% of
    patients have no skin findings\]

-   Danger signs -- Rapid progression of symptoms, respiratory distress
    (eg, stridor, wheezing, dyspnea, increased work of breathing,
    persistent cough, cyanosis), vomiting, abdominal pain, hypotension,
    dysrhythmia, chest pain, collapse

Treatment

-   ABCs with removal of inciting event (stop inciting medication)

-   IM epinephrine (0.3mg) autoinjector into the mid-outer aspect of the
    thigh may be repeated at 5- to 15-minute intervals if there is no
    response or an inadequate response or even sooner if clinically
    indicated

-   Placement in supine position with BLE elevated, unless CI (airway
    swelling/vomiting)

-   Supplemental oxygen

-   Volume resuscitation with IV fluids with 2 large bore IVs

-   Labs: tryptase

Outpatient management

Seasonal allergies

-   Symptoms: runny nose, itchy/watery eyes, congestion, raised wheals
    (hives), eczematous rash

-   Treatment:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Daily PO antihistamine (loratadine, fexofenadine, cetirizine) or
    daily nasal antihistamine (Astelin)

-   Daily nasal fluticasone (Flonase) or Triamcinolone (Nasacort) one
    spray each nostril daily (increase up to BID)

-   Antihistamine Eye Drops (Panatol) for conjunctivitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Refractory to medical therapy: Referral to Allergy and Immunology
    for allergen immunotherapy

Food allergy

-   Combinations of the following symptoms: pruritus; urticaria;
    flushing; swelling of the lips, face, or throat; nausea; vomiting;
    cramping; diarrhea; wheezing; lightheadedness; syncope; or
    hypotension

-   Treatment: Patients should avoid the suspected food until further
    evaluation by an allergist. Prescribe Epinephrine autoinjector PRN
    (educate patient on use).

-   Education: If the patient experiences prompt, complete, and durable
    response to one dose of epinephrine and has access to additional
    epinephrine autoinjectors, the patient does not have to present to
    the ER. Situations that would warrant EMS activation include severe
    anaphylaxis, symptoms that do not resolve promptly, completely or
    nearly completely, or symptoms that return or worsen.

Drug allergy

-   High risk reaction: Severe anaphylactic symptoms withing 1-6 hours
    of medication within the last 5 years, SJS, TEN, Serum sickness,
    Mouth/eye ulcerations

-   Low risk reaction: Greater than 5 years since last reaction,
    Urticaria only, GI symptoms only, Remote childhood reaction with
    limited details, FH of drug allergy, Known tolerance of drug since
    original reaction

Treatment:

-   High risk allergy: Strict avoidance of drug medications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cross reactivity of antibiotics when prescribing:
    <https://www.vumc.org/antimicrobial-stewardship-program/sites/default/files/public_files/Allergy-Chart%20%281%29.pdf>

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Low risk allergy: Referral to drug allergy clinic for
    desensitization to antibiotics

-   Why de-escalate? "A recorded penicillin allergy was associated with
    a 14% increased risk of death. When allergy tested, 95% of adults
    with a recorded penicillin allergy are not allergic" (1)

Anxiety/Depression -- Lauren Waskowicz

Background

-   Anxiety disorders: spectrum of disorders characterized by excessive
    fear, anticipatory anxiety of future threat, or avoidance behaviors

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Includes generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), panic disorder, social
    anxiety disorder, specific phobias, substance-induced anxiety
    disorder

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mood disorders:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Include major depressive disorder (MDD), bipolar disorder (BPD),
    seasonal affective disorder, dysthymia

Presentation

-   MDD: 2+ weeks of ≧ 5/9 SIGECAPS (sleep, interest, guilt, energy,
    concentration, appetite, psychomotor, suicide), or PHQ-2 screen \>2
    / PHQ-9 score \> 4

-   GAD: 6+ months of anxiety and associated restlessness, fatigue,
    impaired concentration, sleep disturbances (use GAD-7 tool to
    assess)

Evaluation

-   Screen for [personal]{.underline} and [family]{.underline} history
    of substance use disorders (often comorbid with mood disorders)

-   Screen for family members with MDD/GAD, and if positive, which SSRIs
    have worked (genetic component of responsiveness)

-   Screen for suicidal ideation ("Have you ever had thoughts about
    wanting to be dead? Not wanting to wake up?")

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If "yes," assess for [active/passive]{.underline} ("in the past
    week, have you had any actual thoughts of killing yourself?"),
    [plan/intent]{.underline} ("do you have a plan to kill yourself and
    do you have intent to act on them?")

-   Ask about prior psychiatric hospitalizations

-   Ask about firearms in the house

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Screen for periods of mania ("have you ever felt like you have
    needed \<3-4 hours a night of sleep?") as this is a
    [contraindication]{.underline} for SSRIs (below)

-   PHQ-9 \> 4 abnormal, \>9 consider therapy +/- pharamcotherapy

Management

-   No psychotherapy offered through VUMC. Counsel to call insurance
    customer service and ask for in-network counselors accepting new
    pts. Can also recommend psychology today website (
    <https://www.psychologytoday.com/us>) for assistance in finding
    therapy based on insurance coverage (.PSYCHTODAY)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   EPIC dot phrase for Nashville therapists (who have accepted OHO pts
    in the past): .CTLPSY-CHRESOURCES and .LRWPSYCHCOMMUNITY

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Persons in crisis: for pts expressing active suicidal ideation with
    intent, can refer to:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Centerstone (TN crisis line): (800) 681-7444

-   Mental Health Cooperative (emergency line): (615) 726-0125

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Safety planning via removal of firearms from home

+-------------+-----------------+------------+-----------+-----------+
|             | **Medication**\ | **Notes**  | **Side    | **C       |
|             | **Dosing        |            | Effects** | ontraindi |
|             | (Ramp)**        |            |           | cations** |
+=============+=================+============+===========+===========+
| **SSRIs**\  | Fluoxetine      | no         | -GI upset | -history  |
| (First Line | (Prozac)        | disco      | (usually  | of mania  |
| for         |                 | ntinuation | recedes   | (can      |
| Initiation) | 10mg QD x2wk    | syndrome   | within    | trigger   |
|             |                 | (4--6 day  | weeks of  | manic     |
|             | 20mg QD x2 wk   | half-life, | ini       | episode)\ |
|             |                 | helpful if | tiation)\ | \         |
|             | assess at 6wk   | pt         | \         | -black    |
|             | fu\             | struggles  | -sexual   | box       |
|             | Uptitrate to    | with       | dy        | suicidal  |
|             | 40mg, 60mg,     | adherence) | sfunction | ideation  |
|             | 80mg (max dose) |            | (delayed  | warning   |
|             |                 |            | eja       | (counsel  |
|             |                 |            | culation, | prior to  |
|             |                 |            | decreased | in        |
|             |                 |            | libido)   | itiation) |
+-------------+-----------------+------------+-----------+-----------+
|             | Sertraline      | \~36 hr    |           |           |
|             | (Zoloft)        | half life  |           |           |
|             |                 |            |           |           |
|             | 25mg QD x2wk    |            |           |           |
|             |                 |            |           |           |
|             | 50mg QD x2wk    |            |           |           |
|             |                 |            |           |           |
|             | assess at 6wk   |            |           |           |
|             | fu\             |            |           |           |
|             | Uptitrate to    |            |           |           |
|             | 100mg, 150mg,   |            |           |           |
|             | 200mg (max      |            |           |           |
|             | dose) QD        |            |           |           |
+-------------+-----------------+------------+-----------+-----------+
|             | Escitalopram    |            |           |           |
|             | (Lexapro)       |            |           |           |
|             |                 |            |           |           |
|             | 10mg QD x2 wk   |            |           |           |
|             |                 |            |           |           |
|             | assess at 6wk   |            |           |           |
|             | fu              |            |           |           |
|             |                 |            |           |           |
|             | Uptitrate to    |            |           |           |
|             | 20mg, 30mg (max |            |           |           |
|             | dose) QD        |            |           |           |
+-------------+-----------------+------------+-----------+-----------+
| **SNRIs**\  | Duloxetine      | average    |           | -hepatic  |
| [AL         | (Cymbalta)      | t          |           | dy        |
| TERNATIVE]{ |                 | herapeutic |           | sfunction |
| .underline} | 20mg QD x2 wk   | dose for   |           |           |
| AGENT for   |                 | GAD (120mg |           |           |
| comorbid    | 30mg QD x2 wk   | QD) vs     |           |           |
| neuropathy  |                 | fi         |           |           |
| and chronic | 60mg QD         | bromyalgia |           |           |
| pain        |                 | or chronic |           |           |
| syndrome    | 60mg BID (max   | pain (60mg |           |           |
|             | dose)           | QD)        |           |           |
+-------------+-----------------+------------+-----------+-----------+
| **TCAs**\   | Nortriptyline   | Nor        | \-        | \-        |
| [AL         | (Pamelor)       | triptyline | anticho   | c         |
| TERNATIVE]{ |                 | is least   | linergic: | oncurrent |
| .underline} | 25mg QD x2wk    | sedating   | cons      | MAOI      |
| AGENT for   |                 | of TCAs.   | tipation, | (         |
| comorbid    | 50mg QD x 2wk   | Not first  | dry       | including |
| insomnia    |                 | line due   | mouth,    | l         |
| and         | 75mg QD x2wk    | to side    | or        | inezolid) |
| neuropathy  |                 | effects    | thostatic |           |
|             | 100 mg QD x2wk; |            | hy        |           |
|             | 150mg (max      |            | potension |           |
|             | dose) QD        |            |           |           |
+-------------+-----------------+------------+-----------+-----------+
| [A          | Bupropion       |            |           | -seizure  |
| DDITIONAL]{ | (Wellbutrin)    |            |           | disorder\ |
| .underline} |                 |            |           | -eating   |
| AGENT for\  | 150mg SR qAM    |            |           | disorder  |
| 1) sexual   | x2wk            |            |           | history   |
| d           |                 |            |           |           |
| ysfunction, | 150mg SR BID    |            |           |           |
| or\         | x2wk            |            |           |           |
| 2)          |                 |            |           |           |
| mood-       | 300mg XL 24hr   |            |           |           |
| predominant |                 |            |           |           |
| symptoms    |                 |            |           |           |
+-------------+-----------------+------------+-----------+-----------+
| [A          | Busiprone       |            |           |           |
| DDITIONAL]{ | (Buspar)        |            |           |           |
| .underline} |                 |            |           |           |
| AGENT for   | 15mg QD         |            |           |           |
| anxiety-    |                 |            |           |           |
| predominant | increase by 5mg |            |           |           |
| symptoms    | QD every week,  |            |           |           |
|             | max dose 60mg   |            |           |           |
|             | QD              |            |           |           |
+-------------+-----------------+------------+-----------+-----------+
|             | Hydroxyzine     | For        | Anticho   | -Avoid in |
|             | (Atarax)        | insomnia   | linergic: | geriatric |
|             |                 | associated | dry       | p         |
|             | 25 to 50 mg QID | with       | mouth,    | opulation |
|             | PRN, can        | anxiety,   | dr        | given     |
|             | increase as     | administer | owsiness, | antich    |
|             | tolerated, max  | at bedtime | QT        | olinergic |
|             | single dose:    |            | pro       | effects   |
|             | 100 mg and max  |            | longation |           |
|             | daily dose: 400 |            |           | -         |
|             | mg              |            |           | Prolonged |
|             |                 |            |           | QT        |
+-------------+-----------------+------------+-----------+-----------+

Asthma -- Faria Khimani 

Definition

-   Chronic inflammatory bronchial hyperresponsiveness, with episodic
    exacerbations and reversible airflow obstruction

-   Prevalence: 5-10% US population

Risk Factors

-   Family history of asthma, history of allergies, atopic dermatitis,
    low SES

Presentation

-   History of cough, recurrent wheezing, recurrent difficulty
    breathing, recurrent chest tightness

-   Symptoms occur or worsen at night or with exercise, viral infection,
    exposure to allergens and irritants, changes in weather, hard
    laughing or crying, stress, or other factors

Diagnostics

-   First line is spirometry. (do NOT need full PFTs)

-   Asthma diagnosis most likely with evidence of obstructive disease
    AND excessive variability in lung function as measured by:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   FEV1 reduction w/ FEV1/FVC reduced compared to lower limit of normal
    (\>0.75-0.80 in adults)

-   Positive bronchodilator responsiveness: Increase in FEV1 \>12% and
    \>200L

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Must rule out other common differentials: Panic attacks, upper
    airway obstruction or infection, foreign body, COPD, ILD, vocal cord
    dysfunction, CHF, ACE-i induced cough, OSA

-   CBC may show eosinophilia

-   If concerned for allergic asthma or allergic bronchopulmonary
    aspergillosis, consider measuring total serum IgE levels

Classify Severity and Assess for Symptom Control with the RULE OF 2s

-   Does the pt have symptoms or require rescue inhaler ≥2 times per
    week?

-   Does the pt endorse nighttime symptoms ≥ 2 times per month?

-   Does the pt use rescue inhaler ≥ 2 times per week?

-   Does the pt ever have to limit activity due to asthma symptoms?

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Severity of   **Impairment over a month**        **FEV1**
  asthma**                                           
  --------------- ---------------------------------- --------------------
  Intermittent    No to all the above                \>80% predicted

  Mild persistent Symptoms \< daily, nighttime       \>80% predicted
                  symptoms \< weekly, SABA use       
                  \<daily, minor activity            
                  limitations                        

  Moderate        Symptoms daily, nighttime symptoms 60-79% predicted
  persistent      ≥ weekly, SABA use daily, some     
                  activity limitations               

  Severe          Symptoms all day, nighttime        \<60% predicted
  persistent      symptoms daily, SABA use \>daily,  
                  extreme activity limitations       
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Management

-   Aim to use the lowest possible step to maintain symptom control.
    Also consider stepping down therapy if pt has been well-controlled
    for \>3 months

-   Prior to escalating therapy, consider

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Adherence to therapy (including inhaler technique), uncontrolled
    comorbidities (allergies, GERD, OSA, etc), and alternative diagnoses

-   Ensure pts receive MDI and spacer teaching for full effect

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Updated Guidelines: PRN ICS - LABA \> PRN SABA Step 1 (mild
    intermittent) and Step 2 (mild persistent). Reduces exacerbations,
    easier to schedule does in future if needed

Follow-up

-   Repeat PFTs q3-6 mos after beginning therapy and q1-2 yrs thereafter

-   Follow-up appointment 1-3mos after initiating therapy, every 3-12 mo
    thereafter

VA specific guidance:

-   Mometasone is the formulary ICS and Wixela (fluticasone-salmeterol)
    is the formulary ICS/LABA

Ordering PFTs: Refer to Pulm section on PFTs for VUMC and VA specifics

+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| Gu      | Step 1  | Step 2  | Step 3  | Step 4  | Step 5  | Step 6  |
| ideline |         |         |         |         |         |         |
+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+=========+
| GINA    | PRN Low | PRN     | Daily + | Daily   | Co      | N/A     |
| 2023    | dose    | l       | PRN-low | medi    | nsider: |         |
|         | I       | ow-dose | dose    | um-dose | Hi      |         |
|         | CS-LABA | I       | I       | ICS     | gh-dose |         |
|         | (b      | CS-LABA | CS-LABA | -LABA + | I       |         |
|         | udesoni | (b      |         | PRN     | CS-LABA |         |
|         | de-form | udesoni |         | l       | x3-6mo; |         |
|         | oterol) | de-form |         | ow-dose | add     |         |
|         |         | oterol) |         | I       | LAMA;   |         |
|         |         |         |         | CS-LABA | or      |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | add     |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | itional |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | th      |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | erapies |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | (bio    |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | logics, |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | a       |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | zithro, |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | or      |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | l       |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | ow-dose |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | PO      |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | gl      |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | ucocort |         |
|         |         |         |         |         | icoids) |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+
| NAEPP   | Interm  | Mild    | M       | M       | Severe  | Severe  |
| 2020    | ittent: | pers    | oderate | oderate | pers    | per     |
|         | PRN     | istent: | pers    | per     | istent: | sistent |
|         | SABA    | PRN     | istent: | sistent | Daily   | refr    |
|         |         | SABA +  |         | refr    | medium  | actory: |
|         |         | daily   | Daily   | actory: | or      | Daily   |
|         |         | l       | +PRN    |         | hi      | hi      |
|         |         | ow-dose | l       | Daily + | gh-dose | gh-dose |
|         |         | ICS     | ow-dose | PRN     | ICS     | ICS     |
|         |         | (bude   | I       | medi    | -LABA + | -LABA + |
|         |         | sonide) | CS-LABA | um-dose | daily   | oral    |
|         |         |         |         | I       | LAMA +  | glu     |
|         |         |         | Alt:    | CS-LABA | PRN     | cocorti |
|         |         |         | PRN     |         | SABA    | coids + |
|         |         |         | SABA +  |         |         | PRN     |
|         |         |         | daily   |         |         | SABA    |
|         |         |         | medi    |         |         |         |
|         |         |         | um-dose |         |         |         |
|         |         |         | I       |         |         |         |
|         |         |         | CS-LABA |         |         |         |
+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+---------+

Dermatology - Lauren Waskowicz

+-----------------------------------+----------------------------------+
| **Primary Lesion**                | **Secondary Lesion**             |
+===================================+==================================+
| Flat : Macule (\<5mm) versus      | Excoriations: "Excavations" dug  |
| patch (\>4mm)                     | into skin secondary to           |
|                                   | scratching                       |
| Raised: Papule (\<5mm) versus     |                                  |
| plaque (\>4mm)                    | Lichenification: Roughing of the |
|                                   | skin with accentuation of skin   |
| Fluid Filled: Vesicule (\<5mm)    | markings                         |
| versus Bullae (\>4mm) versus      |                                  |
| Pustule (pus-filled)              | Scale: Flakes of stratum corneum |
|                                   |                                  |
| Nodule - firm, thicker, deeper, 1 | Crust: Rough surface, dried      |
| and 2 cm in diameter.             | serum, blood, bacteria, and      |
|                                   | cellular debris                  |
| Non Blanching: Petechial (\<4mm)  |                                  |
| versus purpura (4-10mm)           | Ulceration: Loss of epidermis    |
|                                   | and dermis, Erosion: Loss of the |
|                                   | epidermis                        |
+-----------------------------------+----------------------------------+

Corticosteroids: General Principles

-   Main side effects ➔ skin atrophy

-   Face and intertriginous areas ➔ low potency steroids ONLY

-   High potency steroids should be limited to 3 weeks of use

    Optimal absorption if applied after bathing (hydration promotes
    steroid penetration)

-   **Ointments** - most potent due to occlusive effect, good for thick,
    hyperkeratotic lesions and areas of smooth, NON-hairy skin. Avoid
    hairy and intertriginous areas (can cause skin maceration and
    folliculitis)

-   **Creams** - more cosmetically appearing and well tolerated. Less
    potent than ointments

-   **Lotions**: Useful in hairy and intertriginous areas. Less potent
    than creams

+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
| **Low         | **Medium        | **High          | **Very High     |
| Potency**     | Potency**       | Potency**       | Potency**       |
+===============+=================+=================+=================+
| **Desonide**  | **              | **              | **Clobetasol**  |
| 0.05% (cream, | Triamcinolone** | Betamethasone** | 0.05% (cream,   |
| lotion,       | (Kenalog) 0.1%  | dipropionate    | ointment,       |
| ointment)     | (ointment,      | 0.05%           | lotion, gel,    |
|               | cream)          | (ointment,      | foam)           |
| **Tr          |                 | cream, lotion)  |                 |
| iamcinolone** | **H             |                 |                 |
| (Kenalog)     | ydrocortisone** | **              |                 |
| 0.025%        | valerate 0.2%   | Triamcinolone** |                 |
| (ointment,    | (ointment,      | (Kenalog) 0.5%  |                 |
| cream)        | cream)          | (ointment,      |                 |
|               |                 | cream)          |                 |
| **Hyd         |                 |                 |                 |
| rocortisone** |                 |                 |                 |
| acetate (OTC) |                 |                 |                 |
+---------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+

Common Rashes

+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| *          | **Description/Symptoms** | **Management**              |
| *Condition |                          |                             |
| (link to   |                          |                             |
| p          |                          |                             |
| ictures)** |                          |                             |
+============+==========================+=============================+
| [Mo        | \- Erythematous macules  | \- Discontinue offending    |
| rbilliform | ➔ confluent papules      | agent                       |
| Drug       |                          |                             |
| Ra         | \- Trunk ➔ extremities,  | \- Topical Corticosteroids, |
| sh](https: | symmetric                | wet wraps                   |
| //dermnetn |                          |                             |
| z.org/topi | \- Most common           | \- Antihistamines           |
| cs/morbill | precipitants =           |                             |
| iform-drug | antibiotics (beta-lactam | \- If eosinophilia,         |
| -reaction) | antibiotics, sulfa       | kidney/liver dysfunction,   |
|            | drugs), allopurinol,     | mucous membrane lesions or  |
|            | AEDs, NSAIDs             | painful/dusky lesions,      |
|            |                          | consider alternative        |
|            | \- Sx: Pruritus, low     | diagnosis (DRESS, AGEP,     |
|            | grade fever              | SJS/TEN)                    |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [Erythema  | \- Abrupt onset of       | \- Oral antihistamines      |
| M          | papular "target" lesions | and/or topical steroids for |
| ultiforme] | in symmetrical           | itch                        |
| (https://d | acrofacial sites,        |                             |
| ermnetnz.o | +/-mucosal involvement   | \- Treat precipitating      |
| rg/topics/ |                          | infections (HSV tx does not |
| erythema-m | \- Usually precipitated  | alter course of single      |
| ultiforme) | by HSV                   | episode, can help prevent   |
|            |                          | future inf)                 |
|            | \- Sx: Lesions can be    |                             |
|            | painful, pruritic or     | \- Stop offending           |
|            | swollen                  | medications                 |
|            |                          |                             |
|            | \- Systemic symptoms     | \- If recurrent, derm       |
|            | likely attributed to     | referral for prolonged      |
|            | inciting infection (HSV, | antiviral course            |
|            | CMV, EBV, flu, COVID     |                             |
|            | etc)                     |                             |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [Z         | \- Reactivation of VZV   | \- Best treatment is        |
| oster](htt | leading to blistering,   | prevention (shingles        |
| ps://dermn | painful rash in          | vaccine in adults \>50)     |
| etnz.org/t | dermatomal distribution  |                             |
| opics/herp |                          | \- Valacyclovir 1000 mg TID |
| es-zoster) | \- Rash can last 3-4     | if symptoms started w/in 72 |
|            | weeks                    | hours and patient has new   |
|            |                          | lesions) for 7 days OR      |
|            | \- Sx: Painful pustular  | acyclovir 800 mg 5x daily   |
|            | lesions with systemic    | for 7 days                  |
|            | symptoms including       |                             |
|            | fever, headache and      | \- Can be complicated by    |
|            | lymphadenopathy          | post-herpetic neuralgia,    |
|            |                          | manage w/ early antiviral   |
|            |                          | treatment, topical          |
|            |                          | capsaicin, TCAs,            |
|            |                          | gabapentin/pregabalin       |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [          | \- Inflammatory response | \- Mild symptoms + isolated |
| Seborrheic | to malassezia yeasts     | to scalp (i.e. dandruff) ➔  |
| De         |                          | antifungal shampoo (Rx:     |
| rmatitis]( | \- Characterized by      | ketoconazole 2%, OTC:       |
| https://de | erythematous w/          | selenium sulfide 2.5%)      |
| rmnetnz.or | yellowish and greasy     |                             |
| g/cme/derm | scale of scalp, face,    | \- Moderate/severe symptoms |
| atitis/seb | upper trunk,             | w/ scale, inflammation and  |
| orrhoeic-d | intertriginous areas     | pruritus of the scalp➔      |
| ermatitis) |                          | antifungal shampoo + 2 week |
|            | \- Can be associated     | high potency topical        |
|            | with HIV, parkinson\'s   | corticosteroid followed by  |
|            | disease and use of       | 2x weekly use of high       |
|            | neuroleptic medications  | potency topical steroids    |
|            |                          |                             |
|            | \- Chronic, relapsing    |                             |
|            | (mildest form =          |                             |
|            | dandruff)                |                             |
|            |                          |                             |
|            | \- Sx: Usually           |                             |
|            | non-pruritic             |                             |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [Tinea     | \- Presentation depends  | \- Treat all sources of     |
| ](https:// | on location              | tinea to prevent            |
| www.uptoda |                          | re-infection.               |
| te.com/con | \- Pedis: itchy          |                             |
| tents/derm | erosions/scales between  | \- Nystatin IS NOT          |
| atophyte-t | toes,                    | effective treatment         |
| inea-infec | hyperkeratosis/scale     |                             |
| tions?sear | covering soles/sides of  | \- Pedis/Corporis/Cruris:   |
| ch=tinea%2 | feet, vesiculobullous    | if localized infection ok   |
| 0corporis& | blisters of inner aspect | for topical antifungals     |
| source=sea | of foot                  | (clotrimazole 1% BID until  |
| rch_result |                          | clinical resolution 1-4     |
| &selectedT | \- Corporis: solitary    | weeks)                      |
| itle=1%7E7 | circular red patch with  |                             |
| 6&usage_ty | raised scaly leading     | \- Capitis: Oral            |
| pe=default | edge, forms ring-shape   | griseofulvin (500-1000 mg   |
| &display_r | with hypopigmentation    | daily for 4-6 weeks) or     |
| ank=1#H35) |                          | oral terbinafine (250 mg    |
|            | \- Capitis: partial hair | once daily for 4 to 6       |
| \-         | loss, +/- erythema, +/-  | weeks)                      |
| [          | pustular lesions         |                             |
| Pedis](htt |                          | \- Onychomycosis: Oral      |
| ps://dermn | \- Curis: erythematous   | terbinafine (250 mg once    |
| etnz.org/t | bilateral but            | daily for 6 weeks           |
| opics/tine | asymmetrical rash with   | (fingernail) or 12 weeks    |
| a-pedis) - | raised border and        | (toenail)), topical therapy |
| "athlete's | central clearing         | (efinaconazole, amorolfine, |
| foot"      |                          | ciclopirox)                 |
|            | \- Onychomycosis         |                             |
| \-         |                          |                             |
| [Corpor    | \- Perform KOH           |                             |
| is](https: | preparation if possible  |                             |
| //dermnetn | to confirm diagnosis     |                             |
| z.org/topi |                          |                             |
| cs/tinea-c | \- Sx: Can be itchy and  |                             |
| orporis) - | erythematous or          |                             |
| body       | asymptomatic             |                             |
| ringworm   |                          |                             |
|            |                          |                             |
| \-         |                          |                             |
| [Capi      |                          |                             |
| tis](https |                          |                             |
| ://dermnet |                          |                             |
| nz.org/top |                          |                             |
| ics/tinea- |                          |                             |
| capitis) - |                          |                             |
| scalp      |                          |                             |
| ringworm   |                          |                             |
|            |                          |                             |
| \-         |                          |                             |
| [Cr        |                          |                             |
| uris](http |                          |                             |
| s://dermne |                          |                             |
| tnz.org/to |                          |                             |
| pics/tinea |                          |                             |
| -cruris) - |                          |                             |
| "jock      |                          |                             |
| itch"      |                          |                             |
|            |                          |                             |
| \-         |                          |                             |
| [Onychomyc |                          |                             |
| osis](http |                          |                             |
| s://dermne |                          |                             |
| tnz.org/to |                          |                             |
| pics/funga |                          |                             |
| l-nail-inf |                          |                             |
| ections) - |                          |                             |
| fungal     |                          |                             |
| nail       |                          |                             |
| infection  |                          |                             |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [Pa        | \- Inflammation of the   | \- If no abscess formation, |
| ronychia]( | skin around a finger or  | can manage with soaking     |
| https://de | toenail                  | affected digit in warm      |
| rmnetnz.or |                          | water and antiseptics       |
| g/topics/p | \- Can be associated     | (chlorhexidine soaks TID)   |
| aronychia) | with felon (painful      | with mupriocin applied      |
|            | abscess at the base of   | after soaking               |
|            | the toe/nail) or         |                             |
|            | herpetic whitlow (viral  | \- If abscess present ➔     |
|            | cutaneous infection      | I&D + culture               |
|            | caused by HSV)           |                             |
|            |                          | \- Antibiotics indicated if |
|            | \- Usually due to        | symptoms not improving      |
|            | staph/strep or           | after I&D or systemic       |
|            | pseudomonas              | symptoms (dicloxacillin     |
|            |                          | 250-500 mg QID, cephalexin  |
|            | \- Sx: Pain at the site  | 500 mg QID) for 5 day       |
|            | of the infection, can    | duration                    |
|            | develop systemic         |                             |
|            | infection leading to     | \- If risk factors for MRSA |
|            | fever/chills/myalgias    | ➔ Bactrim 1-2 DS tablets    |
|            |                          | BID                         |
|            |                          |                             |
|            |                          | \- If oral flora present ➔  |
|            |                          | augmentin 875/125 mg BID    |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [HSV       | \- Present as clusters   | \- No cure, following       |
| ](https:// | of 2-3 mm umbilicated    | initial infection immunity  |
| dermnetnz. | clear or hemorrhagic     | develops but does not       |
| org/cme/vi | vesicles persisting for  | prevent against further     |
| ral-infect | 5-10 days usually        | attacks                     |
| ions/herpe | preceded by locaozlied   |                             |
| s-simplex) | tingling/burning         | \- Tx w/ topical therapy    |
|            |                          | for mild infections         |
|            | \- Type 1 most commonly  |                             |
|            | associated with oral     | \- For initial infection:   |
|            | lesions, Type 2 w/       | Valacyclovir 500 mg BID 3-5 |
|            | genital lesions          | d, acyclovir 200 mg 5x/d    |
|            |                          | for 5 days                  |
|            | \- Diagnose with viral   |                             |
|            | culture of swab from     | \- For recurrent            |
|            | vesicle or serologic     | infections: oral            |
|            | testing (may be positive | valacyclovir 500 mg BID for |
|            | and not causing          | 3 days or 1 g daily for 5   |
|            | symptoms)                | days OR Acyclovir 800 mg    |
|            |                          | BID for 5 days              |
|            | \- Sx: Lesions are       |                             |
|            | painful, can be          | \- For suppressive therapy: |
|            | associated with mild     | oral valacyclovir 500 mg or |
|            | malaise and fever        | 1 g daily                   |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Candida:   | \- **Balanitis**:        | \- Balanitis: attention to  |
|            | inflammatory versus      | genital hygiene with        |
| \-         | infectious condition of  | retraction of foreskin and  |
| [          | the glans penis. Most    | cleansing for               |
| Balanitis] | commonly infectious      | prevention/therapy          |
| (https://d | cause (candida versus    |                             |
| ermnetnz.o | dermatophytosis)         | \- Clotrimazole cream BID   |
| rg/topics/ |                          | for 7-14 days               |
| balanitis) | \- Sx: penile soreness,  |                             |
|            | dysuria, itchiness,      | \- Intertrigo: Prevention   |
| \-         | bleeding and erythema of | with moisture-free skin,    |
| [Intertr   | the glans                | can use talcum powder to    |
| igo](https |                          | assist in intertriginous    |
| ://dermnet | \- Candidal balanitis    | areas                       |
| nz.org/top | associated with white,   |                             |
| ics/candid | curd-like exudate        | \- Topical antifungal       |
| iasis-of-s |                          | agents (clotrimazole 1%     |
| kin-folds) | \- **Intertrigo**:       | cream BID for 4 weeks, 1%   |
|            | erythematous/macerated   | ointment BID for 2 weeks)   |
|            | plaques with peripheral  |                             |
|            | scaling, often           | \- Oral fluconazole or      |
|            | associated with          | itraconazole for severe,    |
|            | superficial satellite    | generalized and/or          |
|            | papules or pustules      | refractory cases            |
|            |                          |                             |
|            | \- Affects skin below    |                             |
|            | breasts or under         |                             |
|            | abdomen, armpits, groin  |                             |
|            | and web spaces between   |                             |
|            | fingers/toes             |                             |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [          | \- Pityriasis            | \- Pityriasis versicolor:   |
| Pityriasis | versicolor: Superficial  | Topical antifungal          |
| versicolor | fungal skin infection    | treatment with ketoconazole |
| ](https:// | caused by Malassezia     | 2% shampoo (Daily for 3     |
| dermnetnz. |                          | days), selenium sulfide     |
| org/images | \- Hypo/hyperpigmented   | 2.25% shampoo or            |
| /pityriasi | or erythematous          | terbinafine 1% cream        |
| s-versicol | macules/patches or thin  |                             |
| or-images) | plaques most common on   | \- Pityriasis rosacea:      |
|            | upper trunk, upper       | Self-limiting disease       |
| [          | extremities              | therefore treatment is      |
| Pityriasis |                          | symptom management          |
| Rosac      | -Sx: usually             |                             |
| ea](https: | asymptomatic             | \- Apply daily moisturizing |
| //dermnetn |                          | creams, avoid drying soaps  |
| z.org/topi | \- Pityriasis rosacea:   |                             |
| cs/pityria | Self-limiting rash (6-10 | \- Can trial medium potency |
| sis-rosea) | weeks) characterized by  | topical steroids and oral   |
|            | large circular/oval      | antihistamines              |
|            | "herald patch" found on  |                             |
|            | chest/abdomen or back    |                             |
|            | followed by small scaly  |                             |
|            | oval red patches on back |                             |
|            | and chest (sometimes     |                             |
|            | described in Christmas   |                             |
|            | tree pattern)            |                             |
|            |                          |                             |
|            | \- Sx: vary from mild to |                             |
|            | severe itching. ⅔ of     |                             |
|            | patients have flu-like   |                             |
|            | symptoms prior to rash   |                             |
|            | onset                    |                             |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [Atopic    | \- Lesions are pruritic, | \- Avoid triggers (fabrics, |
| De         | erythematous, +/-        | chemicals, humidity, and    |
| rmatitis]( | weeping/exudative, +/-   | dryness, foods)             |
| https://de | blistering. Can become   |                             |
| rmnetnz.or | lichenified and scaly    | \- Daily skin hydration w/  |
| g/topics/t | with fissuring over      | emollients ointments \>     |
| reatment-o | time.                    | creams (take into           |
| f-atopic-d |                          | consideration patient       |
| ermatitis) | \- Most commonly occurs  | tolerability)               |
| (eczema)   | on neck, hands and       |                             |
|            | flexural surfaces in     | \- Topical corticosteroids: |
|            | adults                   | Mild disease -              |
|            |                          | hydrocortisone 2.5% BID     |
|            | \- Associated with       | until 3-5 d after skin      |
|            | atopic triad (asthma,    | clearance. Moderate         |
|            | eczema, and allergies)   | disease - triamcinolone     |
|            |                          | 0.1% or 0.025% Clobetasol   |
|            |                          | cream for up to two weeks   |
|            |                          | followed by mild steroids   |
|            |                          |                             |
|            |                          | \- Skin and face folds      |
|            |                          | treatment: Desonide 0.05%   |
|            |                          | OR topical calcineurin      |
|            |                          | inhibitors (tacrolimus 0.1% |
|            |                          | BID, discontinue when       |
|            |                          | symptoms cleared)           |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [          | \- Clearly defined red   | \- Limited disease ➔topical |
| Psoriasis] | and scaly plaques,       | corticosteroids and         |
| (https://d | symmetrically            | emollients                  |
| ermnetnz.o | distributed              |                             |
| rg/topics/ |                          | \- Scalp/external ear       |
| psoriasis) | \- Most common locations | canal: potent               |
|            | are scalp, elbows, knees | corticosteroids -           |
|            |                          | clobetasol propionate 0.05% |
|            | \- Sx: Pruritus is       | BID until lesions clear     |
|            | common but mostly mild,  |                             |
|            | treating can lead to     | \- Face/intertriginous:     |
|            | hyper/hypopigmented      | low-potency OTC             |
|            | plaques that fade over   | hydrocortisone 1% or        |
|            | time                     | prescription-strength 2.5%  |
|            |                          | BID until lesions clear     |
|            |                          |                             |
|            |                          | \- Thick plaques on         |
|            |                          | extensor surfaces:          |
|            |                          | clobetasol propionate 0.05% |
|            |                          | BID until lesions clear     |
|            |                          |                             |
|            |                          | \- Moderate to Severe ➔     |
|            |                          | Phototherapy + topical      |
|            |                          | steroids/emollients, before |
|            |                          | systemic agents (e.g. MTX)  |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [          | \- Open and closed       | \- Mild acne: daily topical |
| Acne](http | comedones,               | retinoid (tretinoin) +      |
| s://dermne | noninflammatory versus   | benzoyl peroxide (if        |
| tnz.org/to | inflamed                 | papulopustular lesions      |
| pics/acne) | papules/pustules         | present)                    |
|            |                          |                             |
|            | \- Severe cases involve  | \- Moderate/severe:         |
|            | nodules, pseudocysts     | Isotretinoin (cumulative    |
|            | with scarring            | dose of 120-150 mg/kg)      |
|            |                          |                             |
|            |                          | \- If isotretinoin is       |
|            |                          | contraindicated, consider   |
|            |                          | oral doxy (100 mg daily for |
|            |                          | 3-4 m) OR OCP OR            |
|            |                          | spironolactone (25 to 50    |
|            |                          | mg/day in 1 to 2 divided    |
|            |                          | doses, titrate based on     |
|            |                          | response/tolerability)      |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [Allergic  | \- Type of eczema caused | \- Determine allergin, if   |
| Contact    | by allergic reaction to  | not identified easily, can  |
| Dermatiti  | allergen (type IV        | have comprehensive patch    |
| s](https:/ | hypersensitivity),       | testing                     |
| /dermnetnz | usually 48-72 horus      |                             |
| .org/topic | after exposure           | \- Acute/localized rash on  |
| s/allergic |                          | hands/feet or nonflexural   |
| -contact-d | \- Symptoms include      | areas ➔ high potency        |
| ermatitis) | erythematous, indurated  | topical corticosteroids BID |
|            | pruritic plaques, +/-    | until resolution (up to 4   |
|            | edema, +/- blistering,   | weeks) then taper over 2    |
|            | +/- scale                | weeks                       |
|            |                          |                             |
|            | \- Consider triggers     | \- Actue/localized rash on  |
|            | such as nickel,          | face/flexural areas ➔       |
|            | fragrances/perfumes,     | medium/low potency topical  |
|            | work exposures, poison   | steroids BID for 1-2 weeks  |
|            | ivy                      | then taper over 2 weeks OR  |
|            |                          | topical tacrolimus 0.1%     |
|            |                          | until resolution then taper |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [Stasis    | \- Caused by venous      | \- Compression therapy with |
| Derm       | hypertension resulting   | bandaging systems or        |
| atitis](ht | from dysfunction of      | stockings, elevation of     |
| tps://derm | venous valves,           | legs, regular exercise      |
| netnz.org/ | obstruction to venous    | other than standing         |
| cme/dermat | flow                     |                             |
| itis/leg-d |                          | \- Emollient (petroleum     |
| ermatitis) | \- Sx: include edema,    | jelly) application for      |
|            | inflammatory skin        | dryness/pruritus            |
|            | changes, pruritus,       |                             |
|            | tenderness, ulceration,  | \- Acute disease w/         |
|            | varicosity and           | erythema, pruritus,         |
|            | hyperpigmentation        | vesiculation, and oozing ➔  |
|            | (hemosiderin deposition) | consider high/mid-potency   |
|            |                          | topical corticosteroids BID |
|            |                          | for 1-2 weeks               |
|            |                          |                             |
|            |                          | \- Referral to vascular if  |
|            |                          | persistent symptoms         |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+
| [Rosace    | \- Chronic inflammatory  | \- Learn/avoid triggers     |
| a](https:/ | condition affecting      | (alcohol, tobacco),use      |
| /dermnetnz | central face, usually    | gentle skin care products,  |
| .org/topic | appears between 30-60 yo | and sun protection          |
| s/rosacea) |                          |                             |
|            | \- Persistent facial     | \- Consider pharmacological |
|            | redness, teangiectasia,  | intervention with topical   |
|            | thickening of skin and   | brimonidine, laser or       |
|            | possible development of  | intense pulsed light        |
|            | inflammatory             | therapy                     |
|            | papules/pustules.        |                             |
|            |                          | \- If complicated by        |
|            | \- Pathophysiology       | papular/pustular disease,   |
|            | multifactorial, includes | consider topical            |
|            | genetic susceptibility,  | metronidazole 0.75% gel for |
|            | immune dysregulation,    | mild disease, and oral      |
|            | neurocutaneous triggers  | tetracycline/doxycycline    |
|            | (sunlight, temperature,  | for moderate to severe      |
|            | exercise, spicy foods,   | disease                     |
|            | alcohol, stress,         |                             |
|            | tobacco)                 |                             |
+------------+--------------------------+-----------------------------+

Fatigue -- Lauren Waskowicz

Background

-   Obtain a thorough history and validate the pt\'s concerns

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Assess chronicity: acute \<1 month, subacute 1-6 months, chronic \>6
    months

-   Thorough review of systems, as well as questions regarding lifestyle
    (diet/exercise/sleep and any substance use) and social factors
    (financial/relationship stressors)

-   Asses impact on daily life and accommodations the pt has made to
    cope

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Review medication list, age related cancer screening, prior lab
    values and imaging

Common Etiologies

-   In otherwise well appearing individual **consider first screening
    for:**

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Anemia, iron deficiency (even if anemia isn't present)

-   Liver/Kidney dysfunction

-   Thyroid disease

-   Mood disorder (anxiety, depression, adjustment disorder, substance
    use)

-   Sleep Disorder (OSA, narcolepsy, REM sleep disorder, shift work
    disorder)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If above screening is negative or patient is not well appearing, can
    also consider

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cardiopulmonary: CHF, CAD/angina, PVD, obstructive lung disease

-   Endocrine: Diabetes, adrenal insufficiency

-   Hematologic/Neoplastic: occult malignancy

-   Infectious: HIV, mononucleosis, hepatitis, TB, fungal, parasitic,
    long-covid

-   Medication Use: opioids, benzodiazepines, antihistamines, muscle
    relaxants, antidepressants, beta-blockers, GABA analogues,
    substances

-   Rheumatologic: fibromyalgia, PMR, SLE, RA, Sjögren\'s

-   Neurologic: multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis

Evaluation

-   Complete physical exam

-   Lab tests to order if \>1 month duration:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Initial screening should include CMP, CBC w/ diff, iron studies, TSH

-   If not previously evaluated, can check HIV, hepatidities, A1c

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Assess for mood disorder (PHQ-9, GAD7)

-   Assess for sleep disturbance (STOP-BANG, Epworth Sleepiness Scale) ±
    sleep study

-   Age appropriate cancer screening if applicable

-   Other considerations: family medical history, domestic violence,
    housing insecurity, substance use, new medications (OTC,
    supplements)

Management

-   Treatment is largely specific to underlying etiology of fatigue (if
    found)

-   Etiology may never be identified; if undiagnosed for \>6 mo,
    consider myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS)
    as a diagnosis of exclusion

-   Consider empiric trial of antidepressant (SSRI/SNRI/Bupropion) in
    those with residual/idiopathic fatigue and depressed mood -- even if
    pt does not meet MDD criteria

-   Consider referral to long-COVID clinic if symptom timeline
    indicative of post-covid exposure

Gender Affirming Care - Lauren Waskowicz

Documentation:

-   Always ask the patients preferred names and pronouns, document
    preferred name in eSTAR (see below) and document pronouns, sexual
    orientation and gender in "Gender and Sexuality" tab found in the
    drop down menu on the right side of upper dashboard

-   Patient's legal name and sex should be reflected in the chart, if
    patient legally changes sex and gender marker, epic officially can
    reflect that

-   If not, document preferred name in the patient header as below:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Click Patient's Name on eSTAR header to pull up demographics

-   In the box with the patient's name there is this symbol N, clicking
    this will bring up a box that will allow you to enter a "preferred
    name" which will then populate to the patient header

-   Edit your outpatient schedule preferences to show preferred name as
    a column, click on the cogwheels in your whiteboard, move "pref
    name" over to the right for selected columns

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sexual History: Ask the patient\'s permission to discuss sexual
    history, be sure to normalize it and make it a part of every new
    patient visit.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   6 Ps:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Partners: How many partners in the past 6 months and how do partners
    identify (male, female, non-binary etc.)

-   Practices: Type of sex (oral, anal, vaginal). If anal sex, does the
    patient participate in receptive, penetrative or both practices

-   Protection: Protection from STI (abstinence, monogamy, barrier)

-   Past History of STI: Was STI treated and was a test of cure
    performed

-   Pregnancy Intention/Prevention: Is patient/partner trying to
    conceive, if not, what methods are they using for contraception

-   Plus: History of sexual trauma/violence, concerns/satisfaction

Starting Gender Affirming Hormones: (John Hopkins Quick Guide:
<https://bit.ly/GAHT-QUICK-GUIDE>)

-   First 1-2 Visits:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Collect Gender History:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ask patient goals - what do they hope to achieve with Gender
    Affirming Hormone Therapy

-   Are they interested in surgery ➔ Refer as appropriate (see below for
    referrals)

-   Fertility goals? Recommend sperm banking for trans women, evidence
    less clear that testosterone affects future fertility in transmen,
    but egg harvesting still recommended

-   Contraceptive needs (Gender Affirming Hormone Therapy IS NOT birth
    control) ➔ consider progesterone only options in transmen

-   Interest in hair removal (required for most bottom surgeries),
    speech therapy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Comprehensive History and Physical:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Assess health conditions which might be influenced by GAHT: e.g.
    smoking (VTE risk for AMAB), DM, HTN, HLD, CAD, polycythemia, OSA

-   Medication reconciliation for interactions (can contact VIVID PharmD
    Dylan Hughes on eSTAR with questions)

-   Assess social and sexual health needs

-   Obtain Baseline Labs (CBC, CMP, estradiol, total testosterone,
    lipids, a1C)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Assess capacity for consent, start informed consent process:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consent may be verbal or written (MedEx Consent form - "Consent
    Estrogen Hormone Therapy" OR "Consent Testosterone Hormone Therapy")

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Write first prescription (3-6 month supply) & needles (if needed)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Follow Up Visits: (first year q3m, second year q6m then yearly)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ask about physical and emotional changes (see chart for expected
    time course)

-   Assess for side effects

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Injection site reactions

-   Transgender Male: acne, hair loss (consider finasteride), genital
    dryness 2/2 atrophy (consider topical E)

-   Transgender Female: dizziness/hypotension from spiro (consider
    alternate blocker)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Check Blood pressure and CBC, CMP, estradiol, total testosterone
    (check hormone levels midcycle if using injections)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   There are varying opinions on the actual importance/relevance of
    monitoring hormone levels (the following recommendations are from
    Endocrine society)

-   For Feminizing hormones: Estradiol goal of 100-200pg/mL,
    testosterone \<55

-   For Masculinizing hormones: Testosterone goal of 400-700ng/dL

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Adjust hormone doses as needed (see table below)

-   Revisit gender affirming goals ➔ Refer as appropriate

Gender Affirming Hormone Dosing:

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Feminizing Hormones: AFAB         | Masculinizing Hormones: AFAB      |
+===================================+===================================+
| **[ANTI-ANDROGEN:]{.underline}**  | **[TESTOSTERONE]{.underline}**    |
|                                   | cypionate                         |
| **Spironolactone** (most common)  |                                   |
| 50mg bid to start. Titrate up by  | Injectable (IM or subQ)\*:        |
| 50 mg q3 months PRN. Max dose     | typical starting: 50 mg/wk. Low   |
| 200mg bid                         | dose (nonbinary): 25 mg/wk. Max   |
|                                   | dose 100 mg/wk                    |
| **Alternatives**: finasteride     |                                   |
| (adjuvant only), leuprolide       | **OR**                            |
| (expensive), bicalutamide (rarely |                                   |
| 2/2 hepatotoxicity risk)          | Transdermal gel Androgel 50 mg    |
|                                   | daily to start (low dose 25 mg    |
| **[PLUS ESTROGEN:]{.underline}**  | daily) other options: fortesta    |
|                                   | 2%, axiron, testim                |
| **Estradiol**: Topical has lowest |                                   |
| VTE risk.                         | **OR**                            |
|                                   |                                   |
| PO: 2 mg daily to start. Max 6-8  | Transdermal patch Androderm 2-4   |
| mg/day. Split bid for 4+ mg.      | mg daily to start (1-2x2mg        |
| Titrate by 2 mg q3m. Topical:     | patches). Titrate by 2mg q3m. Max |
| patch 0.1mg 2x/week. Titrate      | 8mg/day                           |
| 0.1mg q3m. Max 0.4mg 2x/week.     |                                   |
|                                   | \*Injectable testosterone is      |
| Injectable (IM or sub Q): E       | usually most affordable option    |
| cypionate or E valerate 2-10      |                                   |
| mg/wk or 5-30 mg/ 2 weeks         |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
| (optional) **Progesterone** for   |                                   |
| breast development; mixed         |                                   |
| evidence. May add-on at 1-2 yrs.  |                                   |
| Prometrium 100-200 mg daily.      |                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

FYI: Needles for IM/SQ injections: 18G 1 ½" to draw up **AND** 1 mL 25G
5/8" to inject (subQ) **OR** 3 mL 23G 1-1.5" to inject (IM)

See John Hopkins Quick Guide: <https://bit.ly/GAHT-QUICK-GUIDE> for
further information including expected time course for physical changes
after starting hormone therapy

Referrals:

-   Gender Affirming Care is primary care and can be managed in resident
    clinic without referral

-   VIVID Health is a department at VUMC providing comprehensive and
    affirming care tailored to meet the needs of LGBTQ+ identifying
    adults. Services include primary care, hormone therapy,
    electrolysis, voice care, surgical consults and other related
    transition services.

-   There is now a VIVID health referral workqueue. To refer patients to
    the VIVID network of providers, type "Ambulatory Referral to
    Transgender Clinic" into EPIC orders and in the comments indicate
    what services you are hoping to connect the patient to.

-   If the patient is interested in gender affirming surgery there is
    Transgender health option in the Ambulatory Referral to Plastic
    Surgery order.

-   Questions regarding referrals can be routed to "VIVID Health ADMIN
    pool" for review

Resources:

-   Quick Guide to GAHT: <https://bit.ly/GAHT-QUICK-GUIDE>

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Has information on starting/monitoring hormones, timeline on when to
    expect physical/emotional changes, and other resources

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Guidelines for the Primary and Gender-Affirming Care of Transgender
    and Gender Nonbinary People: <https://transcare.ucsf.edu/guidelines>

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   More comprehensive guide to hormone therapy, gender-affirming care
    surgery, hair removal, tucking, binding, fertility, etc

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   WPATH Standards of Care (Version 8):
    <https://www.wpath.org/publications/soc>

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most comprehensive, international standards of care for Transgender
    and Gender Diverse people

Hypertension (HTN) - Audrey White

Background

-   47% of adults in the US have HTN, yet only 24% of adults with HTN
    have adequate BP control (2021)

-   HTN is associated with ↑CVD risk and is the most prevalent
    modifiable risk factor for CVD

Definitions

-   ACC/AHA 2017: BP ≥ 130/80 or taking antihypertensive mediation

-   Resistant HTN**:** uncontrolled BP despite taking 3 antihypertensive
    medications (including a diuretic) OR ≥ 4 total medications

-   Whitecoat HTN: elevated office BP but normal readings when measured
    with ambulatory or home blood pressure monitoring (ABPM/HBPM)

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
                             Hypertension by        
                             ABPM/HBPM              
  --------------- ---------- ---------------------- ----------------------
                             Yes                    No

  Hypertension by Yes        Sustained hypertension White coat
  office blood                                      hypertension
  pressure                                          

                  No         Masked hypertension    Sustained normotension
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Screening

-   Screen all adults \>18. Less frequent screening (q3-5 yrs) is
    appropriate for adults 18-39 without risk factors and previously
    normal BP. More frequent screening (q6-12mo) for adults ≥40 or with
    risk factors (USPSTF Grade A)

-   Risk factors: older age, black race, family history, excess
    weight/obesity, lifestyle habits (lack of physical activity, stress,
    tobacco use, alcohol use), dietary factors (high salt or high fat
    diet)

-   Consider screening for masked HTN with ABPM/HBPM if SBP 120-129 mmHg
    in office + risk factors (ACC/AHA 2017)

Diagnosis

-   Proper measurement: Avoid caffeine/smoking 30 min prior and empty
    bladder. Have pt sit quietly at rest for 5 min with legs uncrossed.
    Place proper sized cuff on exposed arm, supported at heart level.

-   Hypertension by office BP (≥130/80) and hypertension out of
    officeconfirmed by ABPM or HBPM, as follows:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Daytime mean: SBP ≥ 130 or DBP ≥ 80

-   Nighttime mean: SBP ≥ 110 or DBP ≥ 65

-   24 hr mean: SBP ≥ 125 or DBP ≥ 75

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If ABPM not possible, 2-3 outpt measurements at 1-4 week intervals
    are required to confirm diagnosis

-   A diagnosis can be made without confirmatory readings in these
    circumstances

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   HTN urgency or emergency: SBP ≥ 180 or DBP ≥ 120

-   Initial SBP ≥ 160 or DBP ≥ 100 and evidence of end-organ damage (LV
    hypertrophy, HTN retinopathy, ischemic CVD, CKD)

Evaluation

-   Perform in all pts with newly diagnosed HTN

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   BMP, fasting glucose, CBC, lipid profile, UA, TSH, EKG

-   Calculate 10 yr ASCVD risk

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Distinguish between primary (90% incidence) vs. secondary HTN (10%)

-   Suspect 1º (essential) HTN: gradual onset, family hx, associated
    risk factors

-   Suspect 2º: unusual presentation (new diagnosis in young/elderly,
    abrupt, exacerbation in previously controlled HTN), drug-resistant,
    or the presence of clinical clue (abdominal bruit in renovascular
    HTN, hypokalemia in hyperaldosteronism)

-   Assess for end organ damage: retinopathy (eye exam), CVD/LV
    hypertrophy, HF (TTE), CKD (urine Alb:Cr), PAD (ABI)

+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
| **Common 2^o^     | **Suggestive Features** | **Diagnostic          |
| Causes**          |                         | Testing**             |
+===================+=========================+=======================+
| Drug or alcohol   | History of substance    | UDS, BP improvement   |
| induced           | use (cocaine, caffeine, | after withdrawal of   |
|                   | nicotine, medications)  | suspected agent       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
| Medication        | Steroids, OCP,          | BP improvement after  |
| induced           | sympathomimetic,        | withdrawal of         |
|                   | SNRI/TCA, atypical      | suspected substance   |
|                   | antipsychotics          |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
| OSA               | Apneic events,          | Polysomnography       |
|                   | somnolence, obesity, ↑  |                       |
|                   | neck circumference      |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
| Primary           | Hypokalemia, metabolic  | Plasma                |
| h                 | alkalosis,              | aldosterone/renin     |
| yperaldosteronism |                         | levels\*              |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
| Primary kidney    | Hypervolemia, ↑ Cr,     | UA, urine Alb:Cr      |
| disease           | abnormal UA, family     | ratio, renal US       |
|                   | history of kidney       |                       |
|                   | disease                 |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
| Renovascular      | Abdominal bruit, ↑ Cr   | Doppler renal US      |
| disease (RAS or   | after ACE-I or ARB,     |                       |
| FMD)              | young age, severe HTN   |                       |
|                   | with onset \>55, flash  |                       |
|                   | pulmonary edema         |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+
| Uncommon 2^o^     |                         |                       |
| causes:           |                         |                       |
| Pheochromocytoma, |                         |                       |
| Cushing's         |                         |                       |
| syndrome, thyroid |                         |                       |
| dysfunction,      |                         |                       |
| aortic            |                         |                       |
| coarctation,      |                         |                       |
| primary           |                         |                       |
| hyp               |                         |                       |
| erparathyroidism, |                         |                       |
| acromegaly,       |                         |                       |
| congenital        |                         |                       |
| adrenal           |                         |                       |
| hyperplasia       |                         |                       |
|                   |                         |                       |
| \*Not reliable if |                         |                       |
| taking MRA.       |                         |                       |
| Adjust diagnostic |                         |                       |
| threshold level   |                         |                       |
| if taking         |                         |                       |
| ACEi/ARB.         |                         |                       |
+-------------------+-------------------------+-----------------------+

Management

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ACA-AHA guidelines                              
  (2017) (based on SPRINT                         
  trial)                                          
  ----------------------- ----------------------- ------------------------
  Elevated BP             SBP 120-129 mmHg AND    Lifestyle modifications.
                          DBP \<80 mmHg           Reassess in 3-6 months

  Stage 1                 SBP 130-139 mmHg OR DBP Lifestyle modification.
                          80-89 mmHg              If CVD, T2D, CKD, age ≥
                                                  65 or ASCVD risk ≥ 10%,
                                                  add anti-HTN medication.
                                                  Reassess monthly until
                                                  BP goal is met, then
                                                  measure q3-6 mo

  Stage 2                 SBP ≥140 mmHg OR DBP    Lifestyle modification
                          ≥90 mmHg                and 1-2 anti-HTN
                                                  medications. Reassess
                                                  monthly until BP goal is
                                                  met, then measure q3-6
                                                  mo.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Therapy goals

-   Adults over 60 years: target BP varies by guideline. Consider CVD
    risk and co-morbidities (e.g., stroke) to decide target BP.

-   White coat HTN: lifestyle modification & CVD risk reduction

-   Masked HTN: treatment guided by out-of-office BP measurements

-   Diastolic HTN: treat to prevent LVH and HFpEF

-   BP target:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \<130/80 mmHg: general population

-   \<140/90 (less aggressive goal): frail pts with orthostatic
    hypotension, limited life expectancy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If not meeting goals, combination therapy \> doubling a single
    agent. Preferred combinations

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ACEi/ARB + CCB

-   ACEi/ARB + CCB + thiazide

-   ACEi/ARB + CCB + MRA

-   Do NOT combine BB and non-dihydropyridine CCB

Non-pharmacological lifestyle interventions: indicated for all pts
regardless of stage

-   8-14 mmHg ↓: DASH diet (fresh produce, whole grains, low-fat dairy)

-   5-10 mmHg ↓: weight loss (10kg or 22lbs), expect 1 mmHg for every
    1kg reduction in body weight

-   3-9 mmHg ↓: Na+ restriction (1.5g/d), aerobic exercise for 90-150
    min/week, increased intake of K+ rich foods

-   2-4 mmHg ↓: moderate EtOH (2 drinks/day for men; 1 drink/day for
    women)

-   Medication changes: consider transitioning offending medications

-   Tobacco cessation: smoking increases risk of masked HTN,
    renovascular HTN, severe hypertensive retinopathy, and arterial
    stiffness

Pharmacologic therapy

-   Initial monotherapy: ACEi/ARB, dihydropyridine CCB, or thiazides

-   Degree of BP reduction (not type of medication) is the major
    determinant of CVD risk reduction

-   There is controversial evidence in using race to determine therapy.
    Some studies suggest the benefit of CCB or thiazides in black pts

+------------------+------------------------+--------------------------+
| **Drug Class**   | **Common Drugs**       | **Side effects/          |
|                  |                        | comments**               |
+==================+========================+==========================+
| Thiazide         | HCTZ 12.5-50 mg\       | HypoNa, hypoMg, hypoK, ↑ |
| diuretics        | Chlorthalidone 12.5-25 | uric acid, hypovolemia,  |
|                  | mg (preferred agent    | orthostatic hypotension  |
|                  | based on RCT, but ↑    |                          |
|                  | risk electrolyte       | Contraindicated in       |
|                  | abnormalities)         | pregnancy                |
+------------------+------------------------+--------------------------+
| Angiot           | Lisinopril,            | Angioedema (more common  |
| ensin-converting | benazepril,            | in AA), AKI, hyperK,     |
| enzyme inhibitor | fosinopril, quinapril  | cough                    |
| (ACEi)           | (all 5-40 mg daily)    |                          |
|                  |                        | Contraindicated in       |
|                  | Ramipril, 2.5-20 mg in | pregnancy                |
|                  | 1-2 doses              |                          |
+------------------+------------------------+--------------------------+
| Angiotensin      | Losartan 25 - 100 mg   | AKI, hyperkalemia,       |
| receptor blocker | in 1-2 doses           | angioedema (less         |
| (ARB)            |                        | frequent than ACE-I).    |
|                  | Candesartan 8 - 32 mg  | Less side effects than   |
|                  | in 1-2 doses           | ACEi\                    |
|                  |                        | \                        |
|                  | Irbesartan 150 - 300   | Contraindicated in       |
|                  | mg\                    | pregnancy                |
|                  | Valsartan 80 - 320 mg  |                          |
+------------------+------------------------+--------------------------+
| Calcium channel  | Dihydropyridine:\      | Dihydropyridine:         |
| blocker (CCB)    | Amlodipine 2.5-10 mg   | peripheral edema,        |
|                  | 1-2 doses Nifedipine   | worsening proteinuria    |
|                  | 30-120 mg in 1-2 doses |                          |
|                  |                        | Nondihydropyridine:      |
|                  | Nondihydropyridine:    | constipation, heart      |
|                  |                        | block if used with BB    |
|                  | Diltiazem ER 120-360   |                          |
|                  | mg                     | Amlodipine is safe but   |
|                  |                        | not first line for       |
|                  | Verapamil ER 100-480   | HFrEF. Other CCBs may    |
|                  | mg                     | worsen outcomes in       |
|                  |                        | HFrEF.                   |
+------------------+------------------------+--------------------------+
| M                | Spironolactone 12.5 -  | Good choice for          |
| ineralocorticoid | 50 mg\                 | resistant HTN            |
| receptor         | Eplerenone 25 - 50 mg  |                          |
| antagonist (MRA) |                        | AKI, hyperkalemia\       |
|                  |                        | Spiro                    |
|                  |                        | nolactone---gynecomastia |
|                  |                        | and secondary sexual     |
|                  |                        | side effects             |
+------------------+------------------------+--------------------------+
| Beta blocker     | Atenolol 25- 100mg in  | Reserve for              |
| (BB)             | 1-2 doses              | CHF/CAD/arrhythmia\      |
|                  |                        | Hyperglycemia, fatigue,  |
|                  | Carvedilol 6.25-25 mg  | ↓ HR\                    |
|                  | BID\                   | β 1-selective (atenolol, |
|                  | Metoprolol succinate   | bisoprolol, metoprolol)  |
|                  | 25 - 200 mg QD\        | may be safer in pts with |
|                  | Nebivolol 5 - 10 mg\   | COPD, asthma, diabetes   |
|                  | Labetalol 100 - 300    |                          |
|                  | bid                    |                          |
+------------------+------------------------+--------------------------+
| Vasodilators     | Hydralazine 25-100mg   | Reserve for HTN          |
|                  | in 2--4 doses          | resistant to optimized 4 |
|                  |                        | drug regimen             |
|                  | Minoxidil 5-10mg in    |                          |
|                  | 3-4 doses              | Reflex tachycardia,      |
|                  |                        | fluid retention,         |
|                  |                        | SLE-like reaction        |
+------------------+------------------------+--------------------------+
| Centrally-       | Clonidine 0.1-0.6 mg   | Reserve for resistant    |
| acting agents    | QD, (Weekly            | HTN                      |
| (alpha 2         | transdermal patch      |                          |
| agonists)        | 0.1-0.3mg is preferred | Rebound HTN and          |
|                  | to avoid non-adherence | withdrawal               |
|                  | and subsequent reflex  |                          |
|                  | HTN)                   |                          |
|                  |                        |                          |
|                  | Methyldopa 250-500 mg  |                          |
|                  | QD                     |                          |
+------------------+------------------------+--------------------------+
| Loop diuretics   | Furosemide 20-160 mg   | Reserve for HTN and      |
|                  | QD                     | volume overload states   |
|                  |                        |                          |
|                  | Torsemide 10 -- 100 mg | AKI, hypovolemia, hypoK, |
|                  | QD                     | hypoMg                   |
|                  |                        |                          |
|                  | Bumetanide 0.5 -- 3.0  |                          |
|                  | mg QD                  |                          |
+------------------+------------------------+--------------------------+

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  **Conditions**            **Drug Class**
  ------------------------- ---------------------------------------------
  Heart failure             ACE-I/ARB or ARNI + BB + MRA + diuretics

  CAD                       ACEi/ARB or BB

  Diabetes                  All first line agents, ACEi/ARB if presence
                            of albuminuria

  CKD                       ACEi/ARB

  Recurrent stroke          ACEi/ARB, thiazide
  prevention                

  Pregnancy                 nifedipine, labetalol, methyldopa
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Additional information

-   Refer to Nephrology or HTN specialist when HTN resistant to \>3 meds
    and negative secondary work-up

-   VA Specific Guidance:
    <https://www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/CD/htn/>

-   Agents that require PADR: quinapril, candesartan, irbesartan,
    olmesartan, telmisartan, labetalol, nebivolol, nifedipine SA,
    eplerenone, clonidine patch

-   Walmart: \$4/mo for amlodipine, atenolol, benazepril, clonidine,
    carvedilol, enalapril, furosemide, hydralazine, HCTZ, Irbesartan,
    isosorbide mononitrate, lisinopril, lisinopril/HCTZ, losartan,
    losartan/HCTZ, metoprolol, ramipril

-   Validated BP cuffs: validatebp.org

-   How to get BP cuff at the VA: Prosthetics consult BP Cuff TVHS.
    \*Must answer all questions in the consult, including blood pressure
    cuff size

Immunizations -- Whitney George

+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| COVID-19       | Recommended for all adults                          |
|                |                                                     |
|                | Unvaccinated ➔ 1 dose of Moderna or Pfizer-BioNTech |
|                | vaccine OR 2 dose series of updated Novavax at 0    |
|                | then 3-8 weeks                                      |
+================+=====================================================+
| Influenza      | Recommended for all Adults: 1 dose annually         |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Respiratory    | Recommended for:                                    |
| Syncytial      |                                                     |
| Virus (RSV)    | ➔ 60+ years: consider based on shared shared        |
|                | clinical decision making giving 1 dose to those     |
|                | most at risk for severe RSV disease (heart failure, |
|                | over age 80, cardiopulmonary disease)               |
|                |                                                     |
|                | ➔ Pregnant at 32-36 weeks gestation from            |
|                | Sept-Jannuary (most states)                         |
|                |                                                     |
|                | \*\*\* NOT covered by medicare in clinic\*\*\*      |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Tetanus,       | Recommended for all adults: 1 dose Tdap, then Td or |
| diphtheria,    | Tdap booster q10 years                              |
| pertussis      |                                                     |
| (Tdap or Td)   | ➔ For patients with clean/minor wounds, administer  |
|                | only if \>10 years since last tetanus containing    |
|                | vaccine                                             |
|                |                                                     |
|                | ➔ For all other wounds, administer if \>5 years     |
|                | since last tetanus containing vaccine               |
|                |                                                     |
|                | \*\*\*NOT covered by medicare in clinic\*\*\*       |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Measles,       | Usually given in childhood, recommended for all     |
| mumps, rubella | adults without evidence of immunity to measules,    |
| (MMR)          | mumps or rubellla (2 doses separated by at least 28 |
|                | days)                                               |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Varicella      | Usually given in childhood, recommended for all     |
| (VAR)          | adults without evidence of immunity to varicella -  |
|                | 2 dose series 4-8 weeks apart                       |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Zoster         | Recommended for all adults 50+ years old: 2 dose    |
| recombinant    | series 2-6 months apart                             |
| (RZV)          |                                                     |
|                | \*\*\*NOT covered by medicare in clinic\*\*\*       |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Human          | Recommended for all adults 18-26 years old: 2 or    |
| Papillomavirus | three dose series depending on age at initial       |
| (HPV)          | vaccine                                             |
|                |                                                     |
|                | ➔ Age 9-14 yrs at initial vaccination and recieved  |
|                | 1 dose or 2 doses less than 5 months apart, give    |
|                | additional dose. If given between 9-14 and          |
|                | receieved two doses, at least 5 months apart -- no  |
|                | additional dose                                     |
|                |                                                     |
|                | ➔ Age 15 or older, three dose series at 0, 1-2 m,   |
|                | 6m                                                  |
|                |                                                     |
|                | ➔ Age 27--45 : shared clinical decision making on   |
|                | vaccination (3 dose series)                         |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Pneumococcal\  | Recommended for all adults 65+ years: depends on    |
| (PCV15, PCV20, | previously administered type of Pneumo vaccine,     |
| PPSV23)        | recommend CDC app                                   |
|                | (cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/pneumo/hcp/pneumoapp.html)    |
|                |                                                     |
|                | ➔ If no prior pneumococcal vaccines, can give one   |
|                | dose of PCV15 OR PCV20                              |
|                |                                                     |
|                | ➔ Immunization also recommended for adults 19-64    |
|                | with immunocompromising conditions (renal failure,  |
|                | nephrotic syndrome, immunodeficiencies, iatrogenic  |
|                | immunosuppression, malignancy, HIV, Hodgkin         |
|                | disease, solid organ transplant, asplenia, SSD,     |
|                | alcoholism, chornic heart/liver/lung disease,       |
|                | tobacco use, diabetes)                              |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Hepatitis A    | Recommended for all adults who request vaccination  |
|                | OR is at risk                                       |
|                |                                                     |
|                | ➔ At risk populations include patients with chronic |
|                | liver disease, HIV infection, MSM, IVDU, persons    |
|                | expereincing homlessness, travel in countries with  |
|                | high/intermediate endemic risk, healthcare settings |
|                | with high potential for exposure ➔2 dose (havrix    |
|                | 6-12 m apart) or 3 dose series (Twinrix Hep-A-HepB, |
|                | 0,1, 6 m apart)                                     |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Hepatitis B    | Recommended for:                                    |
|                |                                                     |
|                | ➔ All adults aged 19-56 years: 2 (heplisav 4 wk     |
|                | apart), 3 (Engerix-B, PreHevbrio, or Recombinvax at |
|                | 0,1, 6 m) or 4 dose series (hepA-HepB Twinrix       |
|                | accelerated schedule)                               |
|                |                                                     |
|                | ➔ 60+ years: may receive without risk factors,      |
|                | should receive with known risk factors or requests. |
|                | Risk factors include: Chronic liver disase, HIV,    |
|                | sexual exposure risk, IVDU, Incarceration, travel   |
|                | to countries with high/intermediate enedemic hep B  |
|                | Risk)                                               |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Meningococcal  | Recommended for:                                    |
| A, C, W, Y\    |                                                     |
| (MenACWY)      | ➔ Patients with asplenia (anatomical or             |
|                | functional), including HIV, complement              |
|                | deficiencies, compliment inhibitor medication -- 2  |
|                | dose series (MenACWY) at least 8 weeks apart,       |
|                | revaccinated q5 yr if risk remains                  |
|                |                                                     |
|                | ➔ Patients traveling to countries with hyperendemic |
|                | or epidemic meningococcal disease -- 1 dose MenACWY |
|                | and revaccinate q5yr if risk remains                |
|                |                                                     |
|                | ➔ First-year college studies who live in            |
|                | residential housing or military recruits- 1 dose    |
|                | MenACWY                                             |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Meningococcal  | Recommended for adults 16-23 years: based on shared |
| B\             | clinical decision making, 2 dose series             |
| (MenB)         |                                                     |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+
| Haemophilus    | Recommended for:                                    |
| influenzae     |                                                     |
| type b\        | ➔Adults with anatomic or functional asplenia        |
| (Hib)          | including sickle cell, and stem cell transplant     |
|                | recipients                                          |
+----------------+-----------------------------------------------------+

Lipids -- Leonie Dupuis

Background

-   1º prevention: pts at increased risk who have not yet had a vascular
    event

-   2º prevention: pts with pre-existing occlusive vascular disease or
    ASCVD (e.g. stroke, TIA, CAD + angina, ACS, coronary or arterial
    revascularization, PAD)

-   Screening: All adults ≥ 20y

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   USPSTF 2016 Guidelines: q5years for adults 40-75yrs

-   ACC/AHA 2019 Guideline: adults 20-39 q4-6yrs; \<21yrs if strong fam
    hx; 40-75 "routinely" assess CV risk and calculate ASCVD risk (dot
    phrase .ASCVD2013)

Evaluation

-   Fasting *[not]{.underline}* routinely needed unless evaluating for
    hyperTG; if non-fasting TG \>440, then obtain 12-14h fasting panel

-   Consider 2º causes of HLD in initial workup: hypothyroidism, DM,
    EtOH use, smoking, liver disease, nephrotic syndrome, CKD, meds
    (e.g. thiazide, glucocorticoids)

-   In pts with borderline ASCVD risk (5%-7.5% risk) or hesitant to take
    statins with low risk, CAC score can help with shared decision
    making. Therapy is recommended.

-   Check lipoprotein(a) (once in a lifetime) in pts with personal or
    family history of ASCVD, or in pts with less than expected LDL
    lowering after starting a statin.

Management

-   Lifestyle changes: weight loss, exercise, smoking cessation,
    limiting alcohol

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diet low in sat. fat a/w 15-20 mg/dL ↓ in LDL-C, \~50% ↓risk of CAD

-   Diet [Avoiding]{.underline}: trans/saturated fats (red meat,
    processed meat, butter, cheese), sodium (\<2300 mg/day) and
    sugar-sweetened foods and beverages

-   Diet [Emphasizing]{.underline}: vegetables, fruits, legumes, lean
    protein, whole grains, nuts

Figure from 2018 ACC/AHA Guideline for the management of **primary
prevention** :\
<https://www.ahajournals.org/cms/asset/c4c7b8c7-5c95-40d4-9919-be9c725b5ea9/e1082fig02.gif>

Figure from 2018 ACC/AHA Guideline for the management of **secondary
prevention**:\
<https://www.ahajournals.org/cms/asset/0882d0f2-9af3-4bfa-aefe-c21d406f82be/e1082fig01.jpg>

Statin Therapy

-   Check AST/ALT prior to initiation

-   Note that ASCVD risk equation is best validated for non-Hispanic
    whites and blacks. Consider use of additional risk prediction
    tools/factors in other pt populations

-   Lipid panel should be checked 6-8 weeks following initial statin to
    ensure LDL-C has fallen 30-50%. After this, consider checking lipid
    panel yearly to assess adherence.

+-----------------------+-----------------------+---------------------+
| **Statin Potency**    |                       | **Statin            |
|                       |                       | Properties**        |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+---------------------+
| **High-Intensity**    | **Atorvastatin 40-80  | [Safest in          |
|                       | mg**                  | CKD]{.underline}:   |
| (≥50% ↓LDL-C)         |                       | atorva, fluva (no   |
|                       | **Rosuvastatin 20-40  | renal dose          |
|                       | mg**                  | adj.required)       |
|                       |                       |                     |
|                       |                       | [Safest in          |
|                       |                       | cirr                |
|                       |                       | hosis]{.underline}: |
|                       |                       | prava               |
|                       |                       |                     |
|                       |                       | [Lowest rate of     |
|                       |                       | myo                 |
|                       |                       | pathy]{.underline}: |
|                       |                       | prava, fluva,       |
|                       |                       | pitava              |
|                       |                       |                     |
|                       |                       | [Lower overall      |
|                       |                       | s.e.]{.underline}:  |
|                       |                       | prava, rosuva (both |
|                       |                       | hydrophilic)        |
|                       |                       |                     |
|                       |                       | [Biggest Change in  |
|                       |                       | LDL]{.underline}:   |
|                       |                       | rosuvastatin \>     |
|                       |                       | atorvastatin \>     |
|                       |                       | simvastatin         |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+---------------------+
| *                     | **Atorvastatin        |                     |
| *Moderate-Intensity** | 10**-20mg,            |                     |
|                       | **Rosuvastatin**      |                     |
| (30-49% ↓LDL-C)       | 5-**10mg**            |                     |
|                       |                       |                     |
|                       | **Simvastatin         |                     |
|                       | 20-40mg, Pravastatin  |                     |
|                       | 40**-80mg             |                     |
|                       |                       |                     |
|                       | **Lovastatin          |                     |
|                       | 40**-80mg,            |                     |
|                       | Fluvastatin XL 80mg,  |                     |
|                       | **Fluvastatin 40mg    |                     |
|                       | BID,** Pitavastatin   |                     |
|                       | 1-4mg                 |                     |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+---------------------+
| **Low-Intensity**     | Simvastatin 10mg,     |                     |
|                       | **Pravastatin         |                     |
| (\<30% ↓LDL-C)        | 10-20mg, Lovastatin   |                     |
|                       | 20 mg,** Fluvastatin  |                     |
|                       | 20-40mg               |                     |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+---------------------+
| *\*Dosing with        |                       |                     |
| RCT-proven            |                       |                     |
| LDL-lowering benefit  |                       |                     |
| is **bolded***        |                       |                     |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+---------------------+

Statin Side effects:

-   Spectrum of statin associated muscle symptoms (SAMS) include
    myalgias, myopathy, rhabdomyolysis, autoimmune myopathy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Myalgias: bilateral involving large muscle groups, onset within
    weeks of initiation of therapy and should resolve within weeks of
    cessation; CK should be normal

-   Consider evaluation with CK, BMP, TSH, and vitamin D

-   \"ACC Statin Intolerance Calculator" can help assess etiology of
    symptoms

Additional Information

-   If pt is not tolerating a statin, consider

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Holding statin until symptoms resolve and trialing lower dose or
    other statin

-   Every other day dosing with rosuvastatin (longer half-life and
    hydrophilic)

-   If repeated failed attempts, consider ezetimibe, PCSK9 inhibitor

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider adding ezetimibe if pt has very high ASCVD and LDL \>70
    while on maximally tolerated high-intensity statin

-   PCSK9 inhibitor requires referral to Lipid Clinic

Hypertriglyceridemia

-   Moderate: TG 175-499 mg/dL; Moderate-severe 500 - 999; Severe: TG \>
    1000

-   Focus on addressing lifestyle factors and stopping medication that
    increase TG's (HCTZ, some BB's, estrogens, some ART, antipsychotics)

-   Consider medical therapy when TG\> 500mg/dL (increased risk of
    pancreatitis)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Omega-3-fatty acids (icosapent ethyl) 4gms daily or Vascepa 4gm
    daily

-   Fibrates: fenofibrate 120 mg daily (avoid in CKD), gemfibrozil 600mg
    BID (increased risk of myopathy with concomitant statin)

VA- Specific Guidelines

> <https://www.healthquality.va.gov/guidelines/cd/lipids/index.asp>

-   Lowest LDL goal recognized for VA Criteria for Use is 100

-   Preferred statins: atorvastatin, simvastatin, lovastatin

-   Statins that require PADR: pravastatin, rosuvastatin (2^nd^-line
    high-intensity statin)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Must have documented intolerances or DDI to all preferred statins

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other agents that require PADR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ezetimibe

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pt has tried and failed **or** not tolerated [all]{.underline}
    statins (allergy, AE, etc.)

-   Pt not meeting goal on max dose of statin PLUS bile acid
    sequestrants or niacin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Fenofibrate

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pt has tried all formulary alternatives or has contraindication to
    use of formulary alternatives (statin, niacin, gemfibrozil,
    cholestyramine, fish oil)

-   If TG \> 500 mg/dL, fenofibrate should be approved

Obesity/Nutrition -- Liana Mosley

+------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| Class                              | BMI                             |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| -   Underweight                    | -   \< 18.5                     |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| -   Normal                         | -   18.5 -- 24.9                |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| -   Overweight                     | -   25.0 -- 29.9                |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| -   Obese                          | -   Class I: 30.0 -- 34.9       |
|                                    |                                 |
|                                    | -   Class II: 35.0 -- 39.9      |
|                                    |                                 |
|                                    | -   Class III: \>40             |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------+

Background

-   BMI = Body Weight (kg) / Height (meters)2

-   42% of US adults are obese. 74% of adults are overweight or obese.

Evaluation

-   USPTF: Pts with BMI \>30 should be offered or referred to intensive,
    multicomponent behavioral interventions

-   Screen for co-morbidities: HTN (BP), HLD (lipid panel), DM (A1c),
    MAFLD (LFTs), OSA (polysomnography), consider TSH if other symptoms
    of thyroid dysfunction

Management

-   Goals:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Target weight loss of 5-7% body weight

-   An average deficit of 500 kcal/day should result in an initial
    weight loss of \~0.5 kg/week (1 lb/week)

-   Even weight loss of 3-5% produces clinically meaningful health
    benefits

-   Regaining weight is common, schedule frequent follow up to assess
    and encourage progress

-   Have pts keep a food log or recall last 24 hrs of food history in
    clinic

-   Limit high caloric beverages and processed foods first

-   Encourage accountability partners

-   Share MyPlate information

-   Consider weight loss apps: My Fitness Pal, Lose it, Noom

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dietary options:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Total calorie restriction is the most effective dietary intervention
    for weight loss

-   Generally, encourage patients to pursue whatever dietary
    intervention is most sustainable for their lifestyles

-   Mediterranean diet: high in fresh vegetables/fruits, whole grains,
    legumes, unsaturated fats, moderate diary and EtOH, less meat

-   Associated with decreased overall mortality and CV mortality, may
    decrease DM incidence independent of weight loss

-   DASH diet: 4-5 servings of fruit, 4-5 servings of vegetables, 2-3
    servings of lowfat dairy per day, and \<25 percent dietary intake
    from fat

-   Associated with decreases in SBP and DBP

-   There is mixed evidence for intermittent fasting, low carb, low fat,
    and high protein diets

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Exercise: goal \>30 min, 5-7 days per week

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ideally combination of aerobic and resistance training

-   Exercise alone is not sufficient for weight loss. Associated with
    maintaining weight loss

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pharmacotherapy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   BMI ≥30 or ≥27 with co-morbidity

-   Leads to significant short term weight loss, high rates of rebound,
    weight gain

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bariatric Surgery:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indicated for patients with BMI \>40 or \>35 with obesity related
    co-morbidity and failed lifestyle intervention

-   Referral to Surgical Weight Loss Clinic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Medical Weight Loss Clinic:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can refer for patient with BMI \>30 or \>27 with obesity related
    co-morbidity

-   VA: Consider referral to MOVE program (in-person or telehealth
    options)

+--------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+
| **Medication**     | **Mechanism**        | **Common Side Effects** |
+--------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+
| Phen               | Phentermine:         | Constipation,           |
| termine-topiramate | appetite             | dizziness, dry mouth,   |
| (Qsymia)           | suppression\         | taste changes, tingling |
|                    | Topiramate           | of hands and feet,      |
|                    | (anticonvulsant,     | insomnia                |
|                    | migraine txt):       |                         |
|                    | ?appetite            |                         |
|                    | suppression,         |                         |
|                    | ?altered satiety     |                         |
|                    | perception           |                         |
+--------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+
| Na                 | Naltrexone (partial  | Constipation, diarrhea, |
| ltrexone-bupropion | opioid antagonist;   | dizziness, dry mouth,   |
| (Contrave)         | used for alcohol     | headache, BP,           |
|                    | dependence):         | tachycardia, insomnia,  |
| \*If combo pill    | ?altered satiety     | liver damage,           |
| too \$\$\$, can    | perception\          | nausea/vomiting         |
| try prescribing    | Bupropion            |                         |
| separately         | (antidepressant):    |                         |
|                    | ?altered satiety     |                         |
|                    | perception           |                         |
+--------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+
| Phentermine        | Reduces appetite\    | Dry mouth,              |
| (Ionamin)          | Note: FDA-approved   | constipation, insomnia, |
|                    | only for short-term  | dizziness, nervousness/ |
|                    | use---up to 12 weeks | restlessness headache,  |
|                    |                      | HTN, tachycardia        |
|                    |                      |                         |
|                    |                      | Addictive               |
+--------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+
| Tirzepatide        | GLP-1/GIP Agonist;   | Nausea, vomiting,       |
|                    | reduces appetite     | diarrhea, abdominal     |
| (Zepbound)         |                      | pain, constipation      |
+--------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+
| Semaglutide        | GLP- 1 receptor      | Nausea, vomiting,       |
|                    | agonist; reduces     | diarrhea, abdominal     |
| (SQ:Wegovy)        | appetite             | pain, constipation      |
|                    |                      |                         |
| Liraglutide        |                      |                         |
|                    |                      |                         |
| (SQ:Saxenda)       |                      |                         |
+--------------------+----------------------+-------------------------+

Additional Information

-   EPIC Dot phrases:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   .NHFOODINSECURITY 

-   .NHFOODASIANDIET 

-   .NHFOODLATINDIET 

-   .NHFOODAFRICANDIET 

-   .NHFOODHEALTHYPLATE 

-   .NHOBESITYYMCA 

Preventive Medicine/Screening: USPSTF -- Whitney George

-   Refer to US Preventative Services Task Force for complete list of
    Grade A & B recommendations:
    <https://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/recommendation-topics/uspstf-and-b-recommendations>

-   Grade A recommendation definition: There is high certainty that the
    net benefit is substantial.

-   Grade B recommendation definition: There is high certainty that the
    net benefit is moderate or there is moderate certainty that the net
    benefit is moderate to substantial.

-   Recommend downloading the "CDC Vaccine Schedules" App on your phone
    to easily filter by medical condition or look at contraindications

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| **Preventative        |                       |                       |
| Measures for WOMEN**  |                       |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Cervical cancer       | Ages 21-29: q 3 yrs   | Grade A               |
|                       | with cervical         |                       |
|                       | cytology alone.       |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | Ages 30-65: q 3 yrs   |                       |
|                       | with cervical         |                       |
|                       | cytology alone, every |                       |
|                       | 5 years w/ high-risk  |                       |
|                       | human papillomavirus  |                       |
|                       | (hrHPV) testing alone |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | or q 5 yrs with hrHPV |                       |
|                       | testing in            |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | combination with      |                       |
|                       | cytology (co-testing) |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | \*\*\*ACS 2020        |                       |
|                       | guideline change      |                       |
|                       | --Age 25-65:          |                       |
|                       | preferred HPV test    |                       |
|                       | alone q 5 years (or   |                       |
|                       | HPV/Pap co-test every |                       |
|                       | 5 years or a Pap      |                       |
|                       | every 3 years)\*\*\*  |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Breast cancer         | Women 50-74: q2 years | Grade B               |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | ACS recommends        |                       |
|                       | beginning at age      |                       |
|                       | 45-54 annually, 55+   |                       |
|                       | q2 hrs in women with  |                       |
|                       | average risk.         |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | If family or personal |                       |
|                       | history of breast,    |                       |
|                       | ovarian, tubal, or    |                       |
|                       | peritoneal cancer or  |                       |
|                       | who have an ancestry  |                       |
|                       | associated BRCA1/2    |                       |
|                       | gene mutations -      |                       |
|                       | should assess risk    |                       |
|                       | and refer to genetic  |                       |
|                       | counseling.           |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Folic acid            | All women who are     | Grade A               |
|                       | planning or capable   |                       |
|                       | of pregnancy should   |                       |
|                       | take daily folic acid |                       |
|                       | supplement (0.4 --    |                       |
|                       | 0.8 mg daily)         |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Chlamydia             | All sexually active   | Grade B               |
|                       | women \< 24, older    |                       |
| Gonorrhea             | women with increased  |                       |
|                       | risk                  |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Osteoporosis (DEXA)   | Women \>65,           | Grade B               |
|                       | postmenopausal women  |                       |
|                       | \<65 with increased   |                       |
|                       | osteoporosis risk     |                       |
|                       | (can use FRAX tool)   |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------
  **Preventive Measures                           
  for MEN**                                       

  Abdominal aortic        Men Ages 65-75 who ever Grade B
  aneurysm (AAA)          smoked (at least 100    
  screening               cigarettes total):      
                          one-time screening by   
                          ultrasonography         
  ----------------------- ----------------------- -----------------------

+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| **Preventative        |                       |                       |
| Measures for ALL      |                       |                       |
| pts**                 |                       |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Cholesterol screening | Men \>35 or 20-35     | UpToDate: Grade 2C    |
|                       | with CV risk          |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | Women \>45 or 20-45   |                       |
|                       | with CV risk          |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Colorectal cancer     | All adults age 45-75  | Grade A for ages      |
|                       |                       | 50-75; Grade B for    |
|                       | FOBT annually         | ages 45-49            |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | FIT annually          |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | FIT-DNA (Cologuard)   |                       |
|                       | q1-3 years            |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | Colonoscopy q 10      |                       |
|                       | years                 |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | Flexible              |                       |
|                       | sigmoidoscopy q 5     |                       |
|                       | years                 |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | Screen earlier if:    |                       |
|                       | family hx of CRC or   |                       |
|                       | adenomatous polyps at |                       |
|                       | age \< 60, hx of IBD, |                       |
|                       | a confirmed or        |                       |
|                       | suspected hereditary  |                       |
|                       | CRC syndrome, or a hx |                       |
|                       | abdominal/pelvic      |                       |
|                       | radiation             |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Depression            | Screen for depression | Grade B               |
|                       | in general adult      |                       |
|                       | populations. If       |                       |
|                       | screening, must       |                       |
|                       | ensure systems are in |                       |
|                       | place for accurate    |                       |
|                       | diagnosis, effective  |                       |
|                       | treatment, and        |                       |
|                       | appropriate follow up |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Diabetes screening    | Adults age 35-70 who  | Grade B               |
|                       | are overweight or     |                       |
|                       | obese                 |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Falls                 | Provide exercise      | Grade B               |
|                       | interventions to      |                       |
|                       | prevent falls in      |                       |
|                       | community-dwelling    |                       |
|                       | adults \>65 years old |                       |
|                       | who are at increased  |                       |
|                       | risk for falls        |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Cardiovascular health | Blood pressure        | Grade A               |
|                       | screening annually    |                       |
|                       | adults \>18           |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | Aspirin 81 mg in age  | Grade B               |
|                       | 50-59 with ASCVD risk |                       |
|                       | \>10% in 10 years,    |                       |
|                       | are not at increased  |                       |
|                       | risk for bleeding,    |                       |
|                       | have a life           |                       |
|                       | expectancy of at      |                       |
|                       | least 10 years, and   |                       |
|                       | are willing to take   |                       |
|                       | low-dose aspirin      |                       |
|                       | daily for at least 10 |                       |
|                       | years.                |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
|                       | Statin: See section   | Grade B               |
|                       | on Lipids             |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Hepatitis C           | Adults aged 18 to 79  | Grade B               |
|                       | years (one time       |                       |
|                       | screening)            |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| HIV                   | All adolescents and   | Grade A               |
|                       | adults 15-65          |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | (one time screening)  |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Lung cancer           | Low-dose CT adults    | Grade B               |
|                       | 50-80 w/20 pack year  |                       |
|                       | smoking history and   |                       |
|                       | currently smoke or    |                       |
|                       | quit within the past  |                       |
|                       | 15 years              |                       |
|                       |                       |                       |
|                       | Should discuss risk   |                       |
|                       | vs benefits,          |                       |
|                       | particularly in pts   |                       |
|                       | with serious          |                       |
|                       | co-morbidities who    |                       |
|                       | may not               |                       |
|                       | tolerate/desire       |                       |
|                       | surgery or aggressive |                       |
|                       | treatment.            |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+
| Obesity               | BMI annually in all   | Grade A               |
|                       | adults                |                       |
+-----------------------+-----------------------+-----------------------+

*\
*

Palliative Care

Editor: Liana Mosley, MD

Reviewed by Mohana Karlekar, MD

Code Status Discussion -- Katie Sunthankar

-   The approach to obtaining someone's code status should be thoughtful
    and pertinent to their current admission or recent change in
    clinical status

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ask yourself "Why would this pt code? Is resuscitation a reversible
    treatment in this pt's case? What are the chances that this pt will
    survive to discharge following CPR? Is the anticipated outcome in
    line with the pt's goals?

-   After you have made your assessment, help pt make an educated
    decision based on both the efficacy of resuscitation and the pt's
    goals

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Below are examples of phrases that can be used in framing code
    status.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NEVER say "Do you want us to do everything?" Most pts will respond
    yes to this even if they do not want CPR

-   It is more helpful to give examples of when these situations would
    arise and make recommendations based on your medical judgment
    factoring in pt\'s goals

Admitting a pt:

-   Introduction: Normalize the conversation by stating, "These are
    questions we routinely ask everyone when they come into the
    hospital. This is a way for us to understand your wishes in the
    event you are unable to make your own decisions."

-   Surrogate: "If you were unable to make decisions for yourself, who
    would you trust to make your decisions? The person you pick should
    be able to speak to your wishes and make the same choices you would
    make for yourself."

-   Intubation: Always do this first so you can avoid the sticky DNI but
    not DNR situation. Again, normalize the question. "Everyone has
    different opinions on what types of medical care they would want if
    they became sicker. One of the things we like to talk about are
    ventilators or breathing machines. Some tell us to try a breathing
    machine for a trial, but they would not want to be kept alive on a
    ventilator." Now make a recommendation. "In your case I think if you
    were to need a ventilator, I think it would \[work, not work,\]"
    Pause and allow them to ask questions. Also remember that if they
    say DNI, then they must be DNR because intubation occurs with ACLS
    (this is not allowed at VUMC. It is technically allowed at the VA if
    the pt specifically requests but would not recommend routinely
    providing this option)

-   CPR: Prime this question with "The next question I have to ask you
    can be hard to think about, but it is important that we know what
    you would want in an emergency. Specifically, if you had a cardiac
    arrest where your heart stops beating and you die, would you want
    chest compressions to try and restart your heart? We know based on
    the evidence that CPR is not always successful. It really depends on
    the situation. In your case, I think CPR would be (make a
    recommendation here). Knowing this, would you want us to attempt CPR
    to resuscitate you?"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   A helpful way to share data about the success of CPR: "Can I share
    some numbers about how often CPR can help?" Sometimes using fingers
    to show these numbers helps. "If you take 10 people in this hospital
    and all of their hearts stop beating, which would mean they have
    died, and we get to them as fast as possible, only 3 of them would
    have their hearts restarted and only 1 of them would ever leave the
    hospital."

What if you do not think performing CPR Is medically appropriate?...

-   At the end of the day, it is their decision (attendings may change
    the code status out of medical futility in Tennessee)

-   Code status can be revisited throughout the hospital stay,
    especially if the pt was initially overwhelmed or if their clinical
    status evolves. Sometimes pts find it helpful to have a family
    member or friend present.

-   Consider framing the discussion differently and offer your
    recommendation: "While you are in the hospital, we will support you
    with interventions and medications that we think are helpful based
    on what you have told us important to you. However, we are worried
    that some of the interventions you are asking for may do more harm
    than good. Many people think that CPR works like it does on TV.
    Unfortunately, we know that most pts who need CPR in the hospital do
    not survive like they do on TV. In your case, we do not think it
    would bring you back to your current state. I worry that this is not
    something that will be helpful to you."

-   Another phrase that is helpful (and when the discussion occurs with
    surrogates leads to higher rates of changing code status than saying
    DNR): "Allow for a natural death". For example, "I worry that given
    how sick your \[loved one\] is, that the additional interventions of
    CPR if she were to die, would prevent her from having a natural
    death"

Video Examples for Navigating Difficult Conversations -- Mohana Karlekar

-   Navigating difficult conversations with pts can be daunting
    especially if you have never seen someone do one well before.
    Conversations should follow a logical and sequential approach. much
    like any procedure we perform in medicine. Like all procedures,
    practice makes us better

-   View Video Examples: Search The Learning Exchange "Navigating
    Difficult Conversations With Pts"

-   Good communicators have both formulated their message and identified
    which communication strategy to use before they initiate a
    conversation.

-   Here are some suggestions for "Navigating Difficult Conversations"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Step 1. Determine your message---keep it simple and short

-   Step 2. Identify what type of news you are communicating: breaking
    bad news, assessing understanding of information, communicating
    prognosis, or navigating goals of care

-   Step 3. Pick the video that best suits your purpose

    ![Table Description automatically
    generated](media/image31.png){width="2.3637981189851267in"
    height="1.7337554680664917in"}

Prognosis -- Liana Mosley

Background

-   Prognosis is estimating the likelihood of an outcome (morbidity,
    mortality) due to a medical condition and can help guide clinicians,
    pts, and families in medical decision making.

-   Pts frequently cite life choices rather than medical decisions for
    wanting to know prognosis.

Estimating prognosis

-   Tools

    -   Should be specific to each pt's situation (type of cancer,
        transplant eligibility, co-morbidities, etc.)

    -   Non-disease specific tool: <https://eprognosis.ucsf.edu/>

-   Errors

    -   Studies suggest that clinicians consistently overestimate
        survival

    -   Two factors most associated with clinician error

        -   More clinical experience correlates with less prognostic
            error

        -   Longer duration of pt-clinician relationship correlates with
            more prognostic error

When to discuss prognosis

-   Several studies suggest that across age and cultural background,
    most pts want their physicians to discuss prognostic information
    with them

-   Ideally clinicians should discuss when the pt is not acutely
    decompensating and can process information

-   Earlier prognostic discussions have been shown to decrease rates of
    hospitalization and highly aggressive care (chemotherapy, pressors)
    in terminally ill cancer pts

How to discuss prognosis

-   Common Four-Step approach

    -   Confirm that the pt/family are ready to hear prognostic
        information

    -   Present information using a range: a few days to weeks; 2-4
        months

    -   Allow silence after you provide information; respond to emotion

    -   Use prognostic information for eliciting end-of-life goals

-   Ask-tell-ask

    -   Ask the pt what type of information would be most useful for
        them

    -   Provide information

    -   Ask pt if that answers their question or if they have additional
        ones

-   Pairing hope and worry:

    -   "While I hope that x might happen, I worry that y is a
        possibility."

Other:

-   Helpful phrasing for pts and families resistant to discussing
    prognosis

    -   "In order to make this decision, it would be helpful if we
        talked about how much time you might have left to live. What are
        your thoughts on discussing this information?"

    -   "If you knew time was short for you, what would be important to
        you in making this decision?"

-   The Palliative Care Network of Wisconsin has several helpful "Fast
    Facts" on determining/ communicating prognosis for specific disease
    states:

    -   <https://www.mypcnow.org/fast-fact/prognosis-after-stroke/>

    -   <https://www.mypcnow.org/fast-fact/prognosis-of-anoxic-ischemic-encephalopathy/>

    -   <https://www.mypcnow.org/fast-fact/prognosis-in-hiv-and-aids/>

    -   <https://www.mypcnow.org/fast-fact/prognosis-in-decompensated-liver-failure/>

    -   <https://www.mypcnow.org/fast-fact/prognosis-in-end-stage-copd/>

    -   <https://www.mypcnow.org/fast-fact/determining-prognosis-in-advanced-cancer/>

Cultivation of prognostic awareness:

![](media/image32.png){width="2.9320395888013997in"
height="2.69334208223972in"}

Acute and Chronic Pain -- Thomas Horton, Soibhan Kelley

-   There are physiological AND emotional components to pain.
    Biopsychosocial factors must be addressed. Ex: anxiety/depression,
    physical debility, and poor social support. Many pts will never be
    completely free of pain, so it is important to set realistic
    expectations.

-   Central sensitization is a phenomenon where the nervous system
    persists in a state of high reactivity which lowers the threshold
    for pain stimuli. Two characteristics of centralized pain are
    allodynia (pain from non-painful stimuli) and hyperalgesia (painful
    stimuli perceived as more painful).

Pharmacologic Therapy

-   Acetaminophen: 650mg q6hr or 1g q8h. \<3g/day. (\<2g in liver pts)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid if you are worried about masking fevers

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NSAIDs: a great option for acute pain, especially musculoskeletal,
    headache, and nephrolithiasis in eligible pts (IV/PO ketorolac,
    ibuprofen, naproxen, etc.)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid in acute or chronic kidney disease and ↑ risk of bleeding.
    Caution in CAD/PVD

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Topical analgesics: best for localized pain but utilized frequently
    as part of a multimodal regimen

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lidocaine ointment, patches

-   Menthol salicylate gel

-   Diclofenac gel

-   Capsaicin gel

-   Morphine gel (typically limited to oncology pts with tumor breakdown
    through skin)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Neuropathic agents: Best for neuropathic pain but can be tried for
    other chronic pain or as part of acute pain regimen. SNRIs and TCAs
    can provide additional benefit if a pt has comorbid depression,
    anxiety, or insomnia (TCA). Most agents take 6-8 weeks for peak
    effect.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gabapentin (Initial: 100 to 300 mg 1 to 3 times daily). Can be used
    for acute pain

-   Pregabalin (Initial: 25 to 150 mg/day in 2 to 3 divided doses). Has
    better bioavailability. May work in pts who did not tolerate or did
    not have success with gabapentin

-   Duloxetine (Initial: 30 mg daily for 1 to 2 weeks, then increase to
    60 mg daily as tolerated)

-   Amitriptyline (Initial: 10 to 25 mg once daily at bedtime)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Muscle relaxants: Should be used temporarily and intermittently but
    some benefit from longer term use. Great for paraplegia, spinal
    injury, and spasticity

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Methocarbamol (Initial: 1.5 g 3 to 4 times daily for 2 to 3 days
    then decrease dose to ≤4.5 g/day in 3 to 4 divided doses). Preferred
    initial agent as has least SE.

-   Tizanidine (Initial: 2 to 4 mg every 6 to 12 hours as needed and/or
    at bedtime) -- important to watch out for withdrawal in pts that
    take frequently at home.

-   Cyclobenzaprine (Initial: 5 to 10 mg once daily before bedtime)

-   Metaxalone (Oral: 800 mg 3 to 4 times daily)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Opioids: Frequently used in hospital for acute pain. Limit use as
    much as possible in chronic pain as it contributes to long-term
    central sensitization. May benefit some pt populations but should
    always be used as a component of a comprehensive, multimodal,
    pt-specific treatment plan.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Refer to section under "Opioids: General Principles and Conversions"
    for OME equivalents

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If \>80 OME per day, ensure pt is prescribed naloxone

-   If \>120 OME per day, refer to pain clinic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Common choices for acute pain in hospital (always start at low end
    for opioid naïve):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Oxycodone (PO) 5-10mg q4 to 6 hours prn

-   Hydromorphone (IV) 0.25 to 1mg q2 to 3 hours prn

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For pts on opioids at home, should always continue in hospital to
    avoid withdrawal unless clinically contraindicated. Can always
    titrate dose as needed.

-   Tramadol: Has opioid and NSAID properties. Of note, tramadol also
    inhibits serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake. Metabolized by
    CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 so there is variability between pts. Typical dose:
    25 to 50mg q4 to 6 hours PRN

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NMDA antagonists: usually prescribed by our pain management
    colleagues but worthwhile to think about as a potential option if a
    pt's pain continues to be difficult to control

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ketamine (IV infusion): SE includes AMS/delirium, hallucinations,
    and dissociation.

-   Memantine (PO)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Alpha 2 agonists (central pain): not commonly utilized in everyday
    practice, but helpful in certain pts with chronic pain (off-label),
    guanfacine vs. clonidine

Medications for Imminently Dying Pts

-   General recommendations

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   At VUMC, there is a very helpful order set titled "Comfort Care
    Orders (Trauma, MICU, SICU, NEURO ICU, Palliative Care)"

-   Make sure to remove unnecessary medications, labs, telemetry,
    nursing text orders, etc.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pain

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Morphine 2mg IV or SQ q1h PRN (avoid if renal failure)

-   Hydromorphone 0.25 -- 0.5mg IV or SQ q1h PRN

-   Write as PRN, as needed for pain \> 2/10 or for air hunger

-   If ineffective after 1 hour, increase by 50-100%

-   If given every hour for 3-4 hours, consider an infusion (given PRN
    dose as hourly rate)

-   Fentanyl is not a great option in ICU unless it is a continuous
    drip. Bolus lasts only 15 mins.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dyspnea/tachypnea

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Assess for volume overload, considering decrease or stopping IVFs or
    tube feeds

-   Opioids are the treatment of choice for dyspnea

-   Consider benzodiazepines for air hunger not controlled by opiates

-   Supplemental oxygen for comfort (do not base on O2 sat). Consider
    use of cool air or fan

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Restlessness/agitation/anxiety

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Assess for urinary retention, constipation, pain, and other
    modifiable factors

-   Lorazepam (Ativan) 0.5 -- 1 mg PO or IV q4h PRN (tablet can be made
    into slurry if pt is experiencing dysphagia)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Nausea:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ondansetron (Zofran) 4mg IV q4h or 8mg q8h PRN

-   Promethazine (Phenergan) 25mg PO or PR q6h PRN; caution can be very
    sedating

-   Prochlorperazine (Compazine) 10mg PO or IV q4h PRN

-   Haloperidol (Haldol)

-   If felt to be obstructive in etiology, try dexamethasone 4mg IV or
    SQ q8-12h with octreotide 100-400mcg IV or SQ q8h

-   If felt to be related to anxiety, try lorazepam; see dosing above

-   Scopolamine is highly anti-cholinergic and takes time to be
    effective, so would NOT use in imminently dying pts

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Secretions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Position for comfort; side lying if possible to move sections

-   Remember: The pt is NOT bothered by their own secretions, and it is
    often the family and caregivers who are likely disturbed, so avoid
    deep suctioning.

-   Glycopyrrolate (Robinul) 0.2 -- 0.4 mg SQ or IV q6h PRN

-   Atropine 1% ophthalmic solution 2 drops sublingual 2-4h PRN

Acute Pain for Special Populations

-   Renal dysfunction: Check that meds are renally dosed and start with
    non-sedating options. Avoid NSAIDs, morphine, and codeine.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acetaminophen and topicals

-   Opioids: oxycodone 2.5 to 5 mg, IV hydromorphone 0.25-0.5mg,
    fentanyl IV 25 to 50mcg

-   Gabapentin: Start with spot 100mg. Be extremely careful with quick
    up titration in CKD due to sedation risk.

-   Methocarbamol: no specific renal dosing, try 500-750mg initially

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cirrhosis: Always avoid NSAIDs, morphine, codeine, hydromorphone
    (may be OK in mild to moderate cirrhosis).

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acetaminophen (2g max/d) and topicals are safe

-   Gabapentin: start with spot 100mg

-   Methocarbamol: no specific hepatic dosing, try 500 mg initially

-   Opioids

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   At risk for increased accumulation of toxic metabolites or increased
    bioavailability due to decreased first pass metabolism, liver
    synthetic dysfunction, and protein binding (hypoalbuminemia) i.e.
    opioids are stronger and last longer than expected

-   May precipitate hepatic encephalopathy

-   Degree of hepatic dysfunction determines risk of toxicity

    -   Compensated cirrhosis without synthetic dysfunction is no
        different than general population

    -   Avoid opioids if decompensated especially with hepatic
        encephalopathy

-   Generally should decrease typical starting doses by 50% and increase
    dosing intervals (start low and go slow)

-   Tramadol has reputation of being safer and is commonly used by our
    hepatologists here, but evidence is weak

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   History of substance use disorder: Overnight, always review handoff
    as day team likely has specific plan in place.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   With substance use history, typically rely on multimodal agents as
    above. Pts who are in recovery may prefer to avoid opioids
    themselves.

-   However, pts with OUD can and do have acute, severe pain due to
    injury, infections, procedures, etc. NEVER withhold opiates if
    clinically appropriate, regardless of substance use history.

Opioids: General Principles and Conversion -- Eli Cohen

Oral Morphine Equivalent (OME) Conversion Table:

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Drug             PO     IV      APAP       IR            ER           Notes
  ---------------- ------ ------- ---------- ------------- ------------ ------------
  Tramadol         0.1x   \-      \-         Tramadol      Ultram ER™   NSAID
                                                                        properties

  Morphine         1x     3x      \-         Morphine IR   MS-Contin™   Renally
                                                                        cleared

  Hydrocodone      1x     \-      Lortab     Hydrocodone   NA           

  Oxycodone        1.5x   \-      Percocet   Roxicodone™   Oxycontin™   

  Hydromorphone    4x     20x     \-         IV, Oral      \-           Oral is \$

  Fentanyl         300x   300x    \-         IV, Buccal,   Patch        Dosed in ug,
                                             Nasal                      not mg
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Abbreviations: ER, extended release; IR, immediate release; IV,
intravenous; PO, oral; APAP, Acetaminophen

Pharmacokinetics:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Mechanism              Onset          Peak Effect    Duration
  ---------------------- -------------- -------------- ------------------
  PO                     30 min         1 hr           3 -- 4 hrs

  IV                     5 min          15 min         1 -- 2 hrs
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

-   Conversion:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Transition between opiates is done using oral morphine equivalents
    (OMEs). Each drugs' potency is compared to oral morphine (see
    table). Ex: 1 mg IV morphine = 3 mg PO morphine

-   When titrating doses, you can increase the dose by 25-50% for
    moderate pain and 50-100% for severe pain

-   When transitioning, doses are traditionally reduced by 1/4 to 1/3
    due to cross tolerance; however, if the pain is uncontrolled, it is
    reasonable to not dose reduce to account for this.

-   IR/ER regimens: Consider switching to extended release when
    requiring 3-4 doses of intermediate release (IR) medications in a
    24-hour period regularly. The ER medication should treat the chronic
    pain experienced by a pt. The IR preparation is indicated for
    breakthrough pain. The IR dose should be calculated as 10-20% of the
    total OME dose a pt takes daily. Fentanyl patches should last 72
    hours

![Diagram Description automatically
generated](media/image33.png){width="2.8037970253718285in"
height="0.9776946631671041in"}

Pt Controlled Analgesia (PCA)

-   Pumps can be programmed to deliver a continuous rate and/or a bolus
    dose

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Basal rate: a continuous infusion dosed per hour that cannot be
    adjusted by the pt

-   Demand dose: a pt-directed bolus that is given at a prescribed
    frequency whenever the pt presses the button. Both the dose and
    frequency can be adjusted.

-   The general rule of thumb is to calculate the total OME delivered
    through the demand when a pt is in steady state and convert 75% of
    this dose into the total continuous rate.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Calculating initial doses:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Basal dose: Check what the pt is actually taking at home (may be
    different than what is prescribed, use OME). Take the total daily
    dose and convert to IV and then divide that by 24 hours to get an
    hourly rate. If moderate pain, increase dose by 25-50%; if severe,
    by 50-100%.

-   Demand doses: The bolus dose should be 10-20% of total daily dose.
    The availability is based on the half-life of the medication (2hr
    for IV). Adjust the availability based on how frequently you want pt
    to be able to have a demand dose (e.g if q10min divide by 12 or if
    q15min divide by 8 for 2 hours)

-   Don't forget to set lock-outs (maximum dose that can be given over a
    certain period of time) that includes both basal and demand doses

-   Remember that the basal rate will not get to steady state for at
    least 8 hrs. When you admit pts or are transitioning to a PCA,
    always initiate the PCA pump with a bolus (or loading) dose

    How to Order PCA at VUMC

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Select Analgesic:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \*Hydromorphone (most common): Order "Hydromorphone (DILAUDID) PCA"

-   Fentanyl (if on at home; not a good inpt PCA): Order "Fentanyl PCA"

-   \*Morphine: Order "Morphine PCA"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Select "\[Analgesic\] PCA syringe" and adjust the following to pt's
    needs:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PCA Dose ("Demand"): amount the pt gets when s/he presses the button

-   Lockout Interval: time between which "demand" doses will not be
    administered if s/he presses the button (i.e., the PCA "locks out")

-   Continuous Dose ("Basal"): amount the pt gets per hr in continuous
    infusion

-   Max Dose: maximum amount of analgesic (Basal + Demand) pt can get in
    24 hours

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Select "IV Carrier Fluid Options"\> Choose Fluid option

-   Select all "PCA Nursing Orders"

    How to Order PCA at VA:

-   Under Orders, select "Pain/Sedation Infusions"

-   Under "PCAs," select Analgesic of choice (Hydromorphone or Morphine)

-   Adjust the following:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Load: amount the pt will receive on initial set up of PCA

-   Basal: amount the pt gets per hour in continuous infusion

-   Demand: amount the pt gets when s/he presses the button

Interrogating PCA (to determine amount of analgesia pt received):

-   Look at IV pump display and hit "Channel Select" on PCA

-   Select "Options" in bottom left of IV pump

-   Select "Pt History" on the left of the screen. This shows the
    administration history for a certain time period (e.g., 24h, 12h,
    4h, etc.)

-   Hit "Zoom" on bottom of screen to change time period to 24 hours.
    Should show:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Total Drug: total amount of drug received in last 24 hours

-   Total Demands: amount of times the pt had pushed the button for
    demand dose

-   Delivered: amount of times the pt actually received a demand dose

-   The difference between "Total Demands" and "Delivered" is the number
    of times the pt pushed the button without receiving a dose

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If you have questions about interrogating the PCA, ask the nurses.
    They are a great resource.

Opioid Side Effects

-   Constipation: Dose-dependent and will not develop tolerance. If pt
    is taking opioids, s/he need robust bowel regimen (MiraLAX, senna)
    with goal of BM ≥every 3 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For opioid-specific constipation can do SQ Relistor^TM^
    (methylnaltrexone), but this is expensive and can only be given in
    the PCU or oncology floors at VUMC. For pts with chronic
    opioid-induced constipation as an outpt, can trial oral agents like
    Movantik^TM^ (naloxgeol). Can also consider PO naloxone but it does
    have small amount of bioavailability so watch for systemic reversal.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Nausea: Occurs with opiate naïve p. Consider starting an anti-emetic
    concurrently. Most pts will develop tachyphylaxis with this over a
    day, so the antiemetic can be discontinued

-   Urinary retention: Consider role of opioids in pts with new-onset or
    worsening urinary retention. Try to de-escalate opioid dosing if
    possible.

-   Overdose: In pts with apneic emergency, IV 0.4 mg Naloxone; however,
    low threshold for multiple doses until response. For pts prescribed
    opioids as outpt, need naloxone 4 mg intranasal.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If a pt with chronic opiate dependence is over sedated but not in
    immediate danger of respiratory failure, one can 1) hold the dose of
    opioid and let them wake up on their own or 2) give a dose of
    naloxone 0.02-0.04mg (1/10 of the usual dose). This latter strategy
    prevents opioid withdrawal and precipitation of pain crisis in pts
    on chronic opioids

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pruritis: Due to histamine release from mast cells; can be treated
    with antihistamines. The opioid can also be rotated. Some but not
    all pts will develop tachyphylaxis.

-   Toxicity: Hyperalgesia and neuroexcitatory effects (AMS, myoclonic
    jerking, seizures). Risk factors for neuroexcitatory effects are
    rapid titration, dehydration, and/or renal failure. Treatment is to
    rotate to a higher potency opioid and hydrate when possible.

Non-pharmacologic Therapies

-   Procedural Intervention: best utilized when there is a specific,
    targetable

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Referral to chronic/interventional pain management (Nerve blocks or
    Radio-ablative therapy)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Adjunct therapies: Pt's will have varying opinions and responses on
    adjunctive therapies, but these can be as important as any
    pharmacologic therapy. CBT, personalized exercise regimen, PT/OT,
    chiropractor, acupuncture

-   Additional Resources for Residents

-   Pain Management Center at VUMC

-   Pain Clinic at the VA. Would specify whether or not you are OK with
    them initiating opioids.

-   Complementary and Integrative Health consult at VA

-   Osher Center for Integrative Health at Vanderbilt

Hospice

Background

-   Hospice: aims to provide aggressive palliative care for pts at the
    end of their life, usually when life-prolonging treatment options
    have stopped

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Eligibility: less than or equal to 6 month life expectancy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider: palliative performance scale (PPS) rating of \<50-60%,
    dependence in 3 of 6 ADL's, alteration in nutritional status, or
    documented deterioration in 4-6 months

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Levels of Care

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   General inpt care: Pts must require skilled nursing care that could
    not be provided at home (IV medications, suction, high flow O2,) No
    cost to the pt under this level of care.

-   Home hospice Pts are discharged to their \"home," which could be a
    long term care facility, assisted living facility, or their house.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   What is covered?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Personnel:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hospice RN visits at least weekly and as needed; crisis on-call
    visits available 24/7

-   SW, Chaplain, Hospice MD oversight

-   CNAs: usually 1 hr, 2-3/wk at most

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Medication for comfort

-   Medical equipment for comfort and safety including oxygen

-   Up to 13 months of bereavement for caregivers after the death

-   Respite care for 5 days, usually in a nursing home

-   Inpt hospice at hospice facility or at certain hospitals for symptom
    control for up to 7 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hospice can be offered to pts without insurance.

VA Specifics for Hospice:

-   Main difference compared to VUMC is pt is allowed concurrent care

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   This means vets can continue to receive some treatments for the
    primary condition (e.g. palliative radiation or chemotherapy) and
    still receive hospice services

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Additionally, all veterans that go on hospice should have any needed
    nursing home stay (at a contracted SNF) covered by the VA regardless
    of service connection

-   VA Palliative Care team will help with these referrals

-   One (1) F Status at the VA

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Designates "treating specialty" as NA-HOSPICE. Reduces costs for
    families, helps quality metrics. Use this if pt qualifies and agrees
    to hospice care

-   Write Delayed Transfer Orders: Admit to NA-HOSPICE and Specialty as
    "Hospice for Acute Care"

-   Write a nursing text order to "Change Pt to 1-F Status"

The Death Pronouncement -- Michael J. Neuss

-   This scenario arises in a variety of contexts, including the units,
    wards, and cross-cover. You might know the pt and family well, but
    particularly when cross covering, that may not be the case.

-   This approach to the death pronouncement is based in part on the
    AAFP's "Death Pronouncement: Survival Tips for Residents" (Am Fam
    Physician. 1998 Jul 1;58(1):284-285.)

-   Before Entering

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Familiarize yourself with the most important points of the pt's
    hospitalization and recent events. Be aware of the circumstances of
    the pt's death, particularly whether death was expected or sudden.

-   Inquire as to which family is present including whether the POA is
    currently at bedside.

-   In general, it is best to enter accompanied, ideally with the pt's
    nurse. It is rare for the chaplain to be present but that might also
    be a consideration.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In The Room

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Especially when cross-covering, make sure to introduce yourself to
    family, and allow them time to introduce themselves to you.

-   Less is more when it comes to what you say: It can be good to be
    empathetic (consider only short statements such as "I am sorry for
    your loss"), but focus mainly on the task at hand, allowing time for
    families to be present with their loved one.

-   Explain that you have been called to examine the pt to confirm that
    they have passed. Allow a brief time for questions; it is rare (but
    not impossible) that someone may wish to excuse themselves for the
    pronouncement.

-   Note the location of a working clock when you enter; your watch is
    ok too but do make sure to avoid looking at your smartphone to check
    the time of death.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The Exam and Pronouncement

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Identify the pt by wrist band

-   Confirm that the pt does not respond to stimuli. One discreet way to
    confirm a lack of response to tactile stimuli is to hold the hand,
    and apply pressure to a nailbed, appearing to hold the hand while
    looking at/visually inspecting the face or other part of the body.

-   Confirm the absence of spontaneous respirations and absence of heart
    sounds. Listen for a full minute as some pts have extended periods
    of apnea.

-   Examine the pupils and note the absence of pupillary light reflex.

-   Note the time at which your examination is completed. This is the
    time of death.

-   Make sure to ask if the family would like an autopsy to be
    performed. This is often overlooked, and as awkward as it might feel
    to ask for this, it is a requirement.

-   Make sure you have notified the attending of record.

\*Please see further VA- and VUMC-specific guidance below

Death Process in EPIC

-   The key thing is to ensure that all components are completed in the
    "Discharge as Deceased" tab under the Transfer-Discharge screen

-   EACH AND EVERY component of this tab must be completed before
    Decedent Affairs will accept the body

-   Required steps

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cardiopulmonary Death Charting 🡪 Select "New Reading" and complete.

-   Cardiopulmonary Death 🡪 Select "+Create Note"

-   Medical Examiner Criteria 🡪 Select "+New Reading" Criteria requiring
    notification of ME is listed in a drop down menu in the navigator.
    Includes accidental deaths, threats to public health, suspicion for
    foul play, etc. The Vanderbilt Operator can assist with connecting
    you to the ME; alternatively, you can call 615-743-1800 during
    business hours (M-F 8am -- 4:30pm) or the after-hours pager at
    800-216-0107.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   All pts diagnosed with Covid are automatic ME cases

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Autopsy Criteria 🡪 Select "+New Reading"

-   Preliminary Cause of Death and Date/Time of Death 🡪 Rather than list
    "Cardiopulmonary arrest," be specific (e.g. Pulmonary Embolism,
    Myocardial Infarction, Metastatic Colon Cancer, etc.)

-   Deceased's Info -- Report of Death

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If you need to leave this and return later after collecting
    information, you can access your partially complete entries by
    clicking on the date/time text that appears under the ribbon. This
    is not intuitive because the numbers listing the date/time do not at
    all appear as though they act like a hyperlink (but they do).

-   Be specific. TDS will want you to have listed the name of the family
    you notified, the TDS Case Number (which the RN typically enters),
    and your attending physician's name (to sign the death certificate;
    give their pager number in this subsection).

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Report of Death Note 🡪 Select "+New Reading" and complete.

-   Complete Synopsis + Hospital Course and then at the very bottom
    under Summary of Death select "+Create Note."

-   Once all of this paperwork is finished, be sure to touch base with
    the pt's nurse, usually contact Decedent Affairs and assist in
    making sure the body is moved

Death Process at the VA

![A picture containing timeline Description automatically
generated](media/image34.png){width="2.6569346019247595in"
height="3.135675853018373in"}

Advanced Directives - Manasa Atyam

Advance directives are legal documents that allow a patient to express
their preferences on quality of life, medical care and health care
decision makers in the event they lose the ability to make their own
decisions. Advance care directives remain valid indefinitely. If an
advance care directive does not reflect a patient's wishes, a new
document should be executed and a note should be entered in to the EMR
stating that the current document is no longer valid. The most common
types of advance care directives are:

-   **Living Will:** This document specifies which medical treatments a
    patient would be willing to pursue and allow an individual to
    describe preference about quality of life. Specifically, the living
    will allow a patient to express their wishes on life support,
    cardiac resuscitation, artificial hydration, and nutrition. A living
    will must either be signed by two witnesses or notarized. It does
    not require a lawyer.

-   **Healthcare Power of Attorney** **(HPOA):** This document allows a
    patient to legally designate one to two people to make healthcare
    decisions if a patient loses capacity. The designated HPOA should
    make decisions reflective of the patient's own choices, using
    substituted judgment. Recognizing that patients may change their
    wishes on medical care over time, the HPOA may trump the living will
    in situations where the choices in the living will no longer reflect
    the patient's current wishes on health care.

-   **Physician Order for Scope of Treatment (POST):** This is a
    physician order that specifies which medical interventions should be
    attempted (CPR, mechanical ventilation, artificial hydration, and
    nutrition). Additionally, it details under what circumstances a
    patient would like to be hospitalized and which types of inpatient
    hospital settings (ICU vs. avoid the ICU) are consistent with their
    goals. The POST form is valid in the community (including long term
    care facilities, senior centers, and dialysis units) and in the
    emergency department. It is preferable but not required for a
    patient or their surrogate to sign the POST form. Any patient that
    is DNR or DNR/DNI must have a completed POST form when transferring
    by ambulance.

You can download the form from MedEx or find them here:
https://www.tn.gov/content/dam/tn/health/healthprofboards/hcf/Post_Form.pdf

**How are advance care directives different from code status?**

-   Advance care directives are documents that a *[patient]{.underline}*
    fills out to describe their wishes on medical care. Code status is a
    *[physician order]{.underline}* completed by a health care provider.
    It is important to remind patients and families that even if a
    patient has a completed living will declining CPR/mechanical
    ventilation, the health care providers will assume the patient
    desires CPR/mechanical ventilation, unless an appropriate code
    status order is entered. A new code status order must be entered at
    each admission. If a patient had a code status order placed when
    he/she lacked capacity and then regains capacity on admission, code
    status must be readdressed with the patient.

**TN Advance Care Planning**

The state of Tennessee created a form that combined the contents of a
living will and POA:

<https://www.tn.gov/content/dam/tn/health/documents/Advance_Directive_for_Health_Care.pdf>

This includes:

-   Agent and when they become effective

-   Defining quality of life

-   Wishes for treatment when quality of life is unacceptable (as
    defined in previous section), and condition is irreversible

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CPR

-   Life support (intubation, IVF, pressors)

-   Treatment of new conditions that arise (i.e., antibiotics for new
    infection)

-   Tube feeding/artificial nutrition

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other instructions (free text)

-   Organ donation

-   Signature of person + 2 witnesses (not POA) or notary

Outpatient: Discussions on health care decision makers, wishes on
medical treatment (particularly CPR), mechanical ventilation and
artificial hydration and nutrition should be done periodically with all
patients over the age of 18. This conversation should be part of the
annual visit, especially for those with chronic health conditions,
changes in functional status or a new diagnosis of a serious disease.

Inpatient: Can ask SW to assist with providing these forms

Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation

Editor: Paige Chase, MD

Reviewed by Woody Morgan, MD

Reasons for Consultation or Referral to PM&R -- Bailey Frey

**Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R)** physicians focus on
restoring function and quality of life to those with physical
impairments or disabilities affecting the brain, spinal cord, nerves,
bones, joints, ligaments, muscles, and tendons.

Benefits of PM&R consults include:

-   Recommendations for pts with: Spinal cord injury, traumatic brain
    injury, polytrauma, CVA, amputation, burns, critical illness/acute
    polyneuropathies or myopathies, or prolonged hospitalization

-   Co-management for acute or chronic spasticity, neurogenic bowel and
    bladder, autonomic dysreflexia, paroxysmal sympathetic hyperactivity
    associated with brain injury, contractures, wound care including
    pressure wound insight and/or prevention

-   Assistance with gait impairments of uncertain etiology impacting
    post-acute care disposition safety

-   Confirmation and facilitation of post-acute rehab disposition (SNF
    vs IPR)

-   Help identifying equipment required for discharge

-   Provision of bedside MSK ultrasound-guided diagnostic joint
    aspirations and injections of small and large joints, bursa, and
    periphernal nerve (lateral femoral cutaneous, carpal tunnel, cubital
    tunnel)

Rehabilitation Options -- Bailey Frey

Acute Inpt Rehabilitation (IPR) or Inpt Rehabilitation facility (IRF):

-   IPR involves a multidisciplinary team of physicians, physical
    therapists, occupational therapists, and speech and language
    pathologists

-   Pts admitted to IPR must be able to tolerate a minimum of 3 hours of
    rehab per day for 5 days a week

-   Pts must have medical complexity warranting medical supervision by a
    physician

-   Physicians are required to evaluate admitted pts at least 3 times a
    week

-   Average length of stay (LOS) in acute inpt rehab is 10-12 days

Skilled Nursing Facility (SNF):

-   Pts require skilled needs like wound care, IV therapy, catheter
    care, PT, OT, and/or SLP

-   There are no minimal requirements for daily therapy, but pts may
    receive up to 1.5 hours/day, depending on availability at the
    facility (in practice it is often less than this)

-   Physicians are required to evaluate admitted pts at least once every
    30 days

-   Average LOS is 26 days

Long-Term Acute Care Hospital (LTACH):

-   Pts admitted to LTACHrequire extended hospitalization and include
    those who requires prolonged mechanical ventilation

-   Pts will be recommended for transfer to an LTACH when no reasonable
    functional or medical improvement can be expected in an acute inpt
    stay

-   LTACHs can be within a hospital or may be free-standing

-   Average LOS must be greater than 25 days

Assisted Living:

-   Pts receive a combination of long-term housing, personal care
    services, and health care

-   Designed for individuals who need assistance with activities of
    daily living

-   Can be provided in freestanding communities, near or integrated with
    SNFs, hospitals, or retirement communities

Outpt Services:

-   Can be ordered at discharge with or without official PT/OT
    recommendations

-   Home health (HH): wide range of healthcare services provided in pts
    home

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   HH PT/OT: therapy at home when unable to attend outpt PT/OT, usually
    \~1hr 2-3x/wk

-   HH nursing services: Required for IV antibiotics or PICC line
    maintenance; consider for wound care. Other services include
    medication adherence and reconciliation

-   HH non-skilled aide: outside the scope of acute hospitalization, but
    helps with ADLs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Outpt PT/OT: Consider for those who would benefit from therapy but
    do not meet the qualifications for other dispositions or would
    prefer outpt therapy. Often more robust PT/OT than HH due to access
    to the gym equipment.

Rehab Terms and Definitions -- Devon Shannon

Common Terms and Definitions

-   ADL: bathing, toileting, dressing, eating, mobility (ambulating or
    assistive device), transferring

-   IADL: household chores, finances, meal prepping, shopping,
    medication management, phone use, transportation

    Levels of assistance/functional mobility

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Assist                 Pt Contribution                      Caregiver
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------ ---------------
  Dependent/total        0% of task                           100%

  Maximum                \~25%                                \~75%

  Moderate               \~50%                                \~50%

  Minimal                \~75%                                \~25%

  Contact guard          \~100%; needs stabilization/minor    \--
                         assistance                           

  Supervision/stand by   100%; needs cueing or safety         \--
                         monitoring                           

  Modified-Independent   100%; uses assistive device to aid   \--
                         (e.g. shoe horn, brace, walker) or   
                         requires extra time                  

  Independent            100% of task without any equipment,  
                         assistance, or extra time            
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Types of transfer

-   Hoyer: Pt is dependent on transfer and requires hoyer lift for
    movement place to place

-   Slide board: Good for pts with LE weakness or cannot stand to slide
    into position

-   Squat-pivot: Pt does not fully stand but maintains a squat position
    with caregiver blocking pt's knees and supporting at the waist or
    under arms to transfer. Transfer \~90^o^

-   Stand-step: Pt stands from seated position then steps laterally to
    the next location where they will sit, but does not pivot

-   Stand-pivot: Pt is assisted in standing with gait belt then
    caregiver and pt simultaneously pivot on an axis to chair or bed.
    Transfer \~90^o^

    Manual muscle testing (according to ISNCSCI Exam, see "Spinal Cord
    Injury")

-   Does not use +/- terminology to try to maintain consistency amongst
    evaluators

-   0: no muscle firing; paralysis

-   1: at least trace muscle firing on palpation or visualization, but
    not full ROM

-   2: full ROM of muscle group tested with gravity eliminated

-   3: full ROM of muscle group tested against gravity, but unable to
    provide resistance to examiner

-   4: full ROM of muscle group tested against gravity and able to
    provide moderate resistance

-   5: full ROM of muscle group tested against gravity and able to fully
    resist examiner without breaking strength

Spinal Cord Injury (SCI) -- Paige Chase

Background

-   SCIs are graded according to the American Spinal Injury Association
    (ASIA) grading scale which describes the severity of inury. The
    scale is graded with letters:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ASIA A: complete SCI with no sensory or motor function preserved

-   ASIA B: a sensory incomplete injury with complete motor function
    loss

-   ASIA C: a motor incomplete injury where there is some movement, but
    less than half of the muscle groups are anti-gravity (can lift
    against the force of gravity with full ROM)

-   ASIA D: a motor incomplete injury with more than half of the muscle
    groups anti-gravity

-   ASIA E: neurologically intact

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   17,000 SCIs occur annually. Most are traumatic (MVC and falls are
    the most common causes), but some are "acquired," such as from
    tumors, spinal stroke, and/or abscesses.

Assessment and Classification

-   Mechanism of injury

-   Orther injuries; greater than 50% of cases have concurrent TBI

-   Surgical vs non-surgical intervention

-   International Standards for Neurological Classification of SCI
    (ISNCSCI) Exam

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Full neurological assessment including manual muscle testing
    bilaterally for upper and lower extremities, sensory exam to light
    touch AND pinprick at each dermatome, sacral sensation and rectal
    exam for deep anal pressure and voluntary anal contraction

-   Determine sensory level, motor level, neurological level of injury
    (NLI), and completeness of injury for prognostication

-   Note in regions where there is no myotome to test (thoracic region),
    the motor level is presumed to be the same as sensory level

-   NLI: most caudal segment of the cord with intact sensation and
    anti-gravity (3 or more) muscle function strength, provided that
    there is normal (intact) sensory and motor function

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Classification uses ASIA ISCNSCI exam including bilateral sensory
    level, bilateral motor level, NLI, injury completeness (complete vs
    imcomplete), and AIS Impairment Score

Management

-   Neurogenic bowel: depending on the level, can lead to constipation
    or fecal incontinence

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bowel regimen (stool softeners and laxatives) with bowel program (up
    out of the bed to shower chair for an enema every day to every other
    day)

-   Goal: 1 BM every day during bowel program without incontinence
    inbetween

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Neurogenic bladder: main concerns include urinary retention and
    incontinence

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Managed acutely with foley or straight catheter. Note, even if the
    pt has uerine output, it does not mean that they aren't retaining.
    It may represent overflow incontinence.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Autonomic dysreflexia: an abnormal state of sympathetic overdrive
    from a noxious stimulus

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Unique complication in T6 level or above injuries

-   Symptoms: flushing, sweating, headache, relative hypertension,
    tachycardia, lightheadedness, nausea, anxiety

-   Immediate treatment: sit the pt upright and remove all tight
    clothing

-   Next step: determine source/nxious stimuli

-   Most common causes: urinary retention and constipation followed by
    tight clothing, pressure wound, infection

-   HTN treatment: nitropaste on the forehead (does not work on the
    chest if pt had an injury above the chest)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pressure injuries

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   q2H turns and instruction on pressure relief. Engage wound care and
    nursing as needed.

Spasticity -- Bailey Frei

Background

-   Spasticity is a velocity-dependent increase in resistance to passive
    stretch.

-   It differs from hypertonia, which is resistance to passive stretch
    that is not velocity-dependent

-   Spasticity is believed to result from disruption of descending
    inhibitory modulation of the alpha motor neurons by an upper motor
    lesion, producing hyperexcitability

-   Grading (by the Modified Ashworth Scale)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   0: no increase in tone

-   1: slight increase in muscle tone, manifested by a catch and release
    or by minimal resistance at the end of ROM when affected part is
    moved in flexion or extension

-   1+: slight increase in muscle tone, manifested by a catch followed
    by minimal resistance through the remainder of ROM (less than 50%)

-   2: more marked increase in muscle tone through most of ROM, but
    affected part is easily moved

-   3: considerable increases in muscle tone; passive movement difficult

-   4: affected part is rigid in flexion or extension

Management

-   Spasticity can have functional benefits, including improving
    standing and transfers. However, it can also cause weakness, poor
    dexterity, pain, and contractures.

-   If spasticity is having undesirable effects, the first line of
    treatment is PT/OT and physical modalities such as stretching.

-   Oral medications are the next line of treatment.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Medication        Mechanism of Action   Side Effects/Important
                                          Considerations
  ----------------- --------------------- -------------------------------
  Baclofen          GABA-B agonist        sedation, fatigue, nausea,
                                          centrally acting -- risk of
                                          withdrawal

  Tizanidine        Alpha-2 agonist       sedation, dizziness,
                                          xerostomia, weakness, centrally
                                          acting -- risk of withdrawal

  Diazepam/         GABA-A agonist        sedation, confusion,
  Benzodiazepines                         hypotension, centrally acting
                                          -- risk of withdrawal

  Dantrolene        inhibits Ca release   weakness, sedation, nausea,
                    from sarcoplasmic     hepatotoxicity, acts directly
                    reticulum             on skeletal muscle
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

-   Intrathecal baclofen: reserved for pts who have significant side
    effects with oral anti-spasticity medications or who have severe,
    persistent, and diffuse spasticity despite maximal doses

-   Injections

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Botulinum toxin: Blocks the presynaptic release of acetylcholine
    from motor endplates of the lower motor neuron at the myoneural
    junction. Effect usually lasts 3-8months

-   Alcohol block: Phenol and ethanol are neurolytic agents that can be
    used to block nerves with motor function.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Surgeries

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Selective dorsal rhizotomy, osteotomy, muscle tendon lengthening,
    release, or transfer

\*\*\*If a pt experiences worsening of spasticity, it is important to
consider other underlying conditions such as infections, pressure
ulcers, constipation, or bladder distention\*\*\*

Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) -- new Bailey Frei

Background

-   TBI is categorized as a disruption in brain function due to an
    external blow or force leading to decreased consciousness, memory
    deficits, neurological deficits, or intracranial lesion.

-   Most common causes of TBI are falls and MVC.

-   Falls are the most common cause of TBI in elderly population

Assessment

-   Mechanism of injury

-   Initial GCS

-   Loss of consciousness and duration

-   Other injuries

-   Initial evaluation should include a non-contrasted head CT to rule
    out hemorrhage

-   Full neuro exam including but not limited to cranial nerves,
    strength, cognition (orientation), memory, reflexes, sensation,
    cerebellar testing, range of motion of joints, Babinski, and
    Hoffmann\'s

Classification

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Severity    GCS     Post-Traumatic Amnesia    Loss of Consciousness
  ----------- ------- ------------------------- --------------------------
  Mild        13-15   \<1 day                   \<30 minutes

  Moderate    9-12    1 day to 7 days           \>30 minutes and \<24
                                                hours

  Severe      3-8     \>1 week                  \> 24 hours
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Evaluation and Management

-   Acutely, pts are at risk for seizures, agitation, autonomic
    dysfunction, bowel or bladder dysfunction, wounds, vertigo,
    headaches, cognitive impairment, venous thrombosis, and spasticity.

-   If concerned about TBI would consult PM&R and Speech Therapy for
    assistance in management of complications and assessment of
    cognition

-   If concerned for spasticity refer to "Spasticity section" for
    medication recommendations

Musculoskeletal (MSK) Injuries

Acute Back Pain -- New Christian Roehmer and Valentine Chukwuma

Background

-   \>90% of back pain is nonspecific and musculoskeletal in nature

-   Can't Miss: spinal cord compression, cauda equina, cancer, spinal
    abscess, discitis, or osteomyelitis

-   Extra-axial causes: pancreatitis, nephrolithiasis, pyelonephritis,
    AAA, zoster

Presentation

-   Lumbar strain: diffuse pain in lumbar muscles, may radiate 

-   Degenerative disk or facet process: localized lumbar pain, similar
    to lumbar strain 

-   Inflammatory arthritis: morning stiffness, improves with movement,
    systemic symptoms 

-   Osteoarthritis: pain with use, improves with rest 

-   Herniated disk: radiating pain to legs, often below the knees 

-   Compression fracture: older pts, trauma, spine tenderness on exam 

-   Spinal stenosis: pain improves with flexion (shopping cart sign)

-   Spondylolysis: pain with extension 

-   Spondylolisthesis: pain with activity, improves with rest, can be
    seen with imaging (vertebrae out of alignment)

-   Scoliosis: abnormal spine curvature, seen on physical exam
    inspection 

Evaluation

-   Physical Exam

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Inspection: posture, Adam's Forward Bend Test (screens for
    scoliosis), limb length discrepancy, spine curvature (kyphosis,
    lordosis, scoliosis); compare to normal anatomy 

-   Palpation/Percussion: sensitive for identifying spinal infection,
    metastases, or compression fractures

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Spinous processes, lumbar "step-offs," paravertebral muscles and SI
    joint

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Range of motion: pain with extension and relieved by flexion
    suggests spinal stenosis  

-   Neurologic examination

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   L2: hip flexion; L3: knee extension; L4: dorsiflexion; L5: great toe
    flexion; S1: plantarflexion 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Waddell's Signs: raise suspicion of non-organic pain  

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Superficial tenderness, pain that improves with
    distraction (attention diverted)

-   Pain with sham maneuvers (simulation)

-   Overreaction (disproportionate psychomotor responses)

-   Non-physiologic neurologic deficits

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ESR/CRP: can be used if concern for infection or malignancy

+-------------+-----------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Provocati   |           |                      |                    |
| on Tests of |           |                      |                    |
| the Lower   |           |                      |                    |
| Back        |           |                      |                    |
+=============+===========+======================+====================+
| **Test**    | **I       | **Action**           | **Positive if**    |
|             | solates** |                      |                    |
+-------------+-----------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Straight    | Lu        | Pt is supine, lift   | Positive for       |
| Leg Raise   | mbosacral | one leg (keep        | radiculopathy      |
|             | nerve     | straight) while the  | if pt experiences  |
|             | roots     | other leg is resting | radiating pain to  |
|             |           | flat                 | the leg            |
|             |           |                      | being lifted       |
+-------------+-----------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Slump Test  | Lu        | Pt is sitting, have  | Positive for       |
|             | mbosacral | them slump forward   | radiculopathy      |
|             | nerve     | w/chin touching      |                    |
|             | roots     | chest. Then          | if any of the      |
|             |           | passively extend     | steps reproduces   |
|             |           | knee and dorsiflex   | radicular pain \   |
|             |           | foot                 |  Use with straight |
|             |           |                      | leg raise          |
+-------------+-----------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Gaens       | S         | Pt supine, brings    | Reproduction of    |
| len's Test  | acroiliac | knee of leg of side  | pain deep in upper |
|             | Joint     | not being tested to  | buttocks           |
|             |           | chest and holds it;  |                    |
|             |           | examiner extends     |                    |
|             |           | straight leg being   |                    |
|             |           | tested over edge     |                    |
|             |           | of bed               |                    |
+-------------+-----------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Patrick's   | S         | Pt supine, passively | Reproduction of    |
| (Fabers)    | acroiliac | flex hip to 90º,     | pain deep in upper |
| Test        | Joint     | maximally abduct and | buttocks           |
|             |           | externally rotate    |                    |
|             |           | at hip               |                    |
+-------------+-----------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Sacral      | S         | Pt prone, apply      | Reproduction of    |
| Thrust      | acroiliac | anteriorly directed  | pain deep in upper |
|             | Joint     | thrust over sacrum   | buttocks           |
+-------------+-----------+----------------------+--------------------+
| D           | S         | Pt supine with legs  | Reproduction of    |
| istraction  | acroiliac | extended; place      | pain deep in upper |
|             | Joint     | hands on ASIS on     | buttocks           |
|             |           | symptomatic side and |                    |
|             |           | apply pressure in    |                    |
|             |           | the dorsolateral     |                    |
|             |           | direction            |                    |
+-------------+-----------+----------------------+--------------------+
| C           | S         | Pt lies on           | Reproduction of    |
| ompression  | acroiliac | asymptomatic side    | pain deep in upper |
|             | Joint     | with hips flexed 45º | buttocks           |
|             |           | and knees bent 90º;  |                    |
|             |           | stay behind pt and   |                    |
|             |           | apply pressure to    |                    |
|             |           | anterior rim of      |                    |
|             |           | ilium                |                    |
+-------------+-----------+----------------------+--------------------+

Imaging: 

-   AP and lateral plain films; bilateral oblique films (evaluate for
    spondylolysis)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indications: risk of fracture, red flag symptoms, evaluating for
    ankylosing spondylitis, no improvement in pain after conservative
    therapy after 6-12 weeks

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-contrasted MRI (Preferred)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indications: suspicion for spinal cord/cauda equina compression,
    severe neurological deficits, concern for infection, unexplained
    inflammatory marker elevation

Management

-   First line: conservative therapy for 4 to 6 weeks, avoid bedrest

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PT

-   NSAIDs: ibuprofen 600 -- 800 mg q 4-6 hr, Diclofenac (topical) 2 g
    TID-QID (7 days)

-   Heat, massage, acupuncture

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Adjuncts for pain

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Robaxin: 750 mg -- 1.5 g 3-4 times daily for 2-3 days, then \< 4.5
    g/day over 3-4 doses

-   Flexeril: 5 mg TID, or 5 once QHS with Tylenol or NSAID

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pts with neuro deficits or spinal cord compression warrant urgent
    surgical evaluation

-   Refer to Spine PT program at VUMC

-   Refractory or Severe Pain: Referral to Orthopedics or PM&R spine
    specialist

Knee Pain -- Samuel Lazaroff and Devon Shannon

Background

-   Key features of the history include:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Location: Have pt point to the area that hurts most

-   Weight bearing, systemic symptoms (e.g. fevers)

-   Specific activities that worsen pain: Squatting, twisting, stair
    climbing

-   Trauma and mechanism of injury

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High-energy trauma: high risk of bony and/or ligamentous injury

-   Low-energy trauma and atraumatic etiologies organized by location
    (see table)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presence/absence of effusion and swelling

-   History of prior trauma to the knee

+------------+------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Knee       | Low-Energy Trauma      | Atraumatic                     |
| Location   |                        |                                |
+============+========================+================================+
| Anterior   | Patellar subluxation   | Tendinopathy: patellar or      |
|            | or disl                | quadricep                      |
|            | ocation (instability)  |                                |
|            |                        | Hoffa's fat pad syndrome       |
|            | Patellar fracture      | (inflammation of post-patellar |
|            |                        | fat)                           |
|            | Patellar tendon        |                                |
|            | rupture                | Prepatellar bursitis           |
|            |                        |                                |
|            | Quadriceps tendon      | Patellofemoral pain syndrome   |
|            | rupture                |                                |
|            |                        | Chondromalacia patella         |
|            |                        |                                |
|            |                        | OA                             |
+------------+------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Medial     | MCL tear               | Medial meniscus degenerative   |
|            |                        | tear                           |
|            | Acute medial meniscus  |                                |
|            | tear                   | Pes anserine bursitis          |
|            |                        |                                |
|            |                        | OA                             |
+------------+------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Lateral    | LCL tear               | IT band syndrome               |
|            |                        |                                |
|            | Acute lateral meniscus | Lateral meniscus degenerative  |
|            | tear                   | tear                           |
|            |                        |                                |
|            |                        | OA                             |
+------------+------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Posterior  | PCL tear               | Baker's cyst                   |
|            |                        |                                |
|            | Hyperextension         | Popliteal a.                   |
|            |                        | aneurysm/entrapment            |
+------------+------------------------+--------------------------------+
| Ge         | ACL tear               | Patellofemoral pain syndrome   |
| neralized  |                        |                                |
|            | PCL tear               | Patellar stress fracture       |
|            |                        |                                |
|            | Intra-articular        | Referred from hip or ankle     |
|            | fracture               |                                |
|            |                        | OA                             |
+------------+------------------------+--------------------------------+

Presentation

-   Patellofemoral pain syndrome: anterior pain worse with stair
    climbing

-   Patellar tendonitis: anterior pain worse with jumping

-   IT band syndrome: lateral pain worse with walking/jogging, but
    better with running

-   Bursitis: pain at location of bursa

-   Traumatic effusion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider ACL (usual acute \~hrs) or PCL rupture, meniscus tear
    (usually within 24hrs), patellar instability (dislocation of
    subluxation), bone bruise, fracture 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Atraumatic Effusion:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Activity related: consider osteoarthritis or osteochondral injury

-   Non activity related: autoimmune, crystalline arthropathy, Lyme
    disease, septic arthropathy (including gonococcal)

-   Less common causes: primary bone tumor, viral infection (Parvo),
    hyperparathyroidism, hemochromatosis, syphilis, sarcoid, Whipple's

Evaluation

-   Physical Exam

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gait

-   IPASS: Inspection, palpation, active/passive ROM, strength, special
    tests (see below)

-   Check for effusion with milk maneuver, balloting

-   Neurovascular exam including reflexes if applicable

-   Examine the back, hip, and ankle

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Aspirate if effusion present and no clear diagnosis or concern for
    septic joint (order cell count with diff, crystal analysis, +/- gram
    stain and culture)

-   Ottawa Knee Rule = Imaging if 1 of following: 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \> 55 y/o 

-   Isolated tenderness of patella 

-   Tenderness of fibular head 

-   Unable to flex 90° º

-   Unable to ambulate 4 steps at time of injury and at time
    of evaluation 

+------------+---------+----------------------------+-----------------+
| P          |         |                            |                 |
| rovocation |         |                            |                 |
| Tests of   |         |                            |                 |
| the Knee   |         |                            |                 |
+============+=========+============================+=================+
| **Test**   | **Iso   | **Action**                 | **Positive if** |
|            | lates** |                            |                 |
+------------+---------+----------------------------+-----------------+
| Anterior   | ACL     | Hip flexed and knee in 90° | Tibia           |
| Drawer     |         | of flexion, pull           | tran            |
|            |         | anteriorly on tibia        | slates forward  |
+------------+---------+----------------------------+-----------------+
| Pivot      | ACL     | With knee extended,        | Translation of  |
| Shift      |         | internally rotate the foot | femur           |
|            |         | and apply valgus force     |                 |
|            |         |                            | or tibia        |
+------------+---------+----------------------------+-----------------+
| Lachman    | ACL     | With knee flexed 20°, hold | Soft end point  |
|            |         | thigh down with one hand   | of tibial       |
|            |         | while pulling anteriorly   | translation     |
|            |         | on tibia with your other   |                 |
|            |         | hand (with thumb on tibial |                 |
|            |         | joint line)                |                 |
+------------+---------+----------------------------+-----------------+
| Posterior  | PCL     | With hip flexed and knee   | Tibia           |
| drawer     |         | in 90° of flexion, push    | transl          |
|            |         | posteriorly on tibia       | ates backwards  |
+------------+---------+----------------------------+-----------------+
| Varus      | LCL     | With knee flexed at 30°,   | Pain and laxity |
| stress     |         | apply varus stress         | laterally       |
+------------+---------+----------------------------+-----------------+
| Valgus     | MCL     | With knee flexed at 30°,   | Pain and laxity |
| stress     |         | apply valgus stress        | medially        |
+------------+---------+----------------------------+-----------------+
| Joint line | Me      | Palpate                    | Reproduces pain |
| te         | niscus  |                            | at site         |
| nderness   |         |                            |                 |
+------------+---------+----------------------------+-----------------+
| McMurray   | Me      | With hip & knee flexed,    | Click, pop, or  |
|            | niscus  | apply:                     | r               |
|            |         |                            | eproduces pain  |
|            |         | Medial: valgus force and   |                 |
|            |         | internal rotate foot       |                 |
|            |         |                            |                 |
|            |         | Lateral: varus force and   |                 |
|            |         | externally rotate foot     |                 |
+------------+---------+----------------------------+-----------------+
| Thessaly   | M       | With pt standing on 1 leg  | Clip, pop, or   |
|            | eniscus | flexed \~30°, have pt      | reproduces pain |
|            |         | rotate medially and        |                 |
|            |         | laterally on planted knee  |                 |
+------------+---------+----------------------------+-----------------+
| Noble      | IT      | Pt lies on unaffected      | Click, pop, or  |
| Co         | band    | side, flex knee to 90°     | r               |
| mpression  |         | while pressure applied to  | eproduces pain  |
|            |         | distal IT band (lateral    |                 |
|            |         | epicondyle)                |                 |
+------------+---------+----------------------------+-----------------+
| Patellar   | P       | With knee extended and     | R               |
| co         | atello- | quads relaxed, apply       | eproduces pain  |
| mpression  | femoral | direct pressure to         |                 |
|            | pain    | anterior patella as pt     |                 |
|            |         | tightens quads             |                 |
+------------+---------+----------------------------+-----------------+
| Patellar   | P       | With knee flexed to 30°,   | Pt grimaces or  |
| ap         | atello- | displace                   | tries to        |
| prehension | femoral | patella laterally          | straighten leg  |
|            | pain    |                            |                 |
+------------+---------+----------------------------+-----------------+

Imaging

-   X-ray: AP, lateral, and sunrise view (best for patellar).

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   OA hallmarks: Subchondral sclerosis, osteophyte, joint space
    narrowing, bone cyst

-   Obtain in standing position or else joint space narrowing may not be
    apparent

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   MSK U/S: Allows for dynamic imaging. \~100% sensitive
    for effusion and can visualize ligaments, muscles, tendons, joint
    space, and vasculature

-   MRI:  indicated after failure of conservative management or when
    considering surgical repair (e.g. concern for ligament tear in
    primarily young active individuals)

Treatment

-   RICE (rest, ice, compression, elevation) for acute injuries

-   Bracing is good for kinesthetic reminder and stability

-   NSAIDs, topical Diclofenac, antibiotics if iffusion or bursa tapped
    indicates infection

-   PT for 4-6 weeks for OA, ligamentous, muscular, or meniscal injury

-   Referral to Sports Medicine or PM&R for non-operative interventions
    such as corticosteroid injections or viscosupplement injections

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Surgery typically reserved for young, active individuals with
    ligamentous injury

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   

Neck Pain -- Samir Khan and Valentine Chukwuma

Background

-   Most common cause of neck pain in adults: Degenerative changes of
    the cervical spine

-   Most atraumatic neck pain does not require imaging

Presentation

-   Cervical muscle strain:  pain + stiffness with movement due to
    muscular injury

-   Degenerative disc disease/osteoarthritis: pain + stiffness with
    movement from derangement in disc architecture leads to inability to
    distribute pressure in the joint

-   Cervical radiculopathy: neuropathic pain, sensory abnormalities,
    and/or weakness in an upper extremity (often radiating to hand)

-   Cervical myelopathy: spinal cord compression causing neurologic
    dysfunction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Earliest symptom is gait disturbance. Pain is uncommon

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-cervical conditions: shoulder pathology, migraine/headaches,
    occipital neuralgia, torticollis, thoracic outlet syndrome, angina
    pectoris/MI, bony metastases, vertebral artery or carotid artery
    dissection, fibromyalgia, meningitis, transverse myelitis 

-   Posterior neck pain 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Axial only 🡪 MSK (sprain vs degenerative disc disease) 

-   Axial + Extremity Pain 🡪 Radiculopathy 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Anterior neck pain 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Common sources: esophageal, thyroiditis, carotidynia, lymphadenitis,
    Ludwig's angina

-   Red flags: recent rauma, lower extremity weakness, gait abnormality,
    bowel/bladder incontinence, fever, weight loss 

Evaluation

-   Determine MSK (axial pain) vs. radiculopathy/myelopathy vs
    non-spinal 

+---------------+-------------+-----------------------+---------------+
|  Provocation  |             |                       |               |
| Tests of the  |             |                       |               |
| Neck          |             |                       |               |
+===============+=============+=======================+===============+
| Test          | Isolates    | Action                | Positive if   |
+---------------+-------------+-----------------------+---------------+
| Spurling's    | Cervical    | Downward pressure     | Reproducible  |
| test          | rad         | applied to top of     | pain beyond   |
|               | iculopathy  | head with extended    | shoulder\     |
|               |             | neck and rotates to   | Neck pain     |
|               |             | affected side         | alone is not  |
|               |             |                       | specific      |
+---------------+-------------+-----------------------+---------------+
| Elvey\'       | Cervical    | Head                  | Reproduction  |
| s upper limb  | rad         | turn contralaterally, | of symptoms   |
|               | iculopathy  | arm is abducted while |               |
| tension test  |             | the elbow extended    |               |
+---------------+-------------+-----------------------+---------------+
| Hoffman sign  | Co          | Loosely hold middle   | There is      |
|               | rticospinal | finger and flick the  | flexion &     |
|               | lesion      | fingernail downward,  | adduction of  |
|               | (UMN)       | allowing the middle   | thumb/index   |
|               |             | finger to flick       | finger on the |
|               |             | upward reflexively    | same hand     |
+---------------+-------------+-----------------------+---------------+

-   Imaging indications: neuro deficits, red flag symptoms, persistent
    pain (\> 6 weeks) 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cervical  X-ray: 2-view (AP and lateral) 

-   Cervical MRI: Visualizes spinal cord, nerve roots, bone marrow,
    discs and soft tissues

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Usually w/o contrast; can consider contrast if malignancy or
    infection suspected

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   EMG/Nerve Conduction Studies: Not routinely used for neck pain
    evaluation, but can be used to distinguish cervical radicular pain
    from peripheral causes of extremity dysesthesia

Management

-   Cervical strain, cervical radiculopathy: PT and

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   5d course of oral prednisone 60-80 mg, followed by 7-14 day taper

-   Anti-spasmodic prn: Flexeril or Robaxin

-   If not improving or progressive symptoms refer to Ortho Spine + PM&R

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cervical myelopathy requires urgent surgical evaluation  

Shoulder Pain -- Joseph Nowatzke and Devon Shannon

Presentation

-   Brachial plexopathy: varied in presentation but usually some
    component of pain, weakness, or paresthesias

-   Brachial neuritis (Parsonage-Turner): sudden unilateral shoulder
    pain with subsequent weakness and/or muscle atrophy

-   Vascular pathology (e.g. thoracic outlet syndrome, thrombus,
    atherosclerosis, vasculitis): Typical symptoms include tightness,
    heaviness, cramping, or arm weakness with or without activity.

-   Rotator cuff injuries:  

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Impingement syndrome: pain with abduction and internal rotation;
    supraspinatus is most susceptible

-   Tendinopathy: develops after repetitive motions; pain worsens with
    active movement

-   Tendont tear: develops as a progression of tendinopathy; develops
    weakness and pain

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Labral tear and SLAP (superior labral tear from anterior to
    posterior): develops in repetitive overhead motions (swimming,
    baseball, tennis); often described as a "catching" sensation 

-   Adhesive capsulitis "frozen shoulder": stiffened glenohumeral joint,
    diminished active and passive ROM; increased frequency in diabetics 

-   AC (acromioclavicular) joint pain: usually secondary to trauma or
    fall on outstretched arm; anterior shoulder pain with AC tenderness;
    can develop OA  

-   Glenohumeral OA: Degeneration of articular cartilage and subchondral
    bone with narrowing of the glenohumeral joint. Presents in older
    adults with progressively worsening anterior shoulder pain and
    stiffness in both passive and active ROM

-   Biceps tendinopathy: Localized anterior shoulder pain, worsened with
    overhead lifting. When rupture develops, will often have a "lump"
    and acute worsening of symptoms 

-   Posterior shoulder pain often related to cervical radiculopathy 

Evaluation

-   Physical exam

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IPASS. Be sure to palpate SC joint, AC joint, biceps groove,
    acromion, spine of scapula, greater tuberosity of humerus

-   C -pine: Evaluate C-spine as origin of pain that may be referred to
    the shoulder

-   Palpate common myofascial trigger points: trapezius, levator
    scapulae

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Imaging:  

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Not as useful as a thorough physical exam, especially if
    non-traumatic pain 

-   X-ray: AP (internal rotation, external rotation), lateral, scapular
    and axillary views 

-   CT: Often reserved for traumatic fracture and artificial joint
    assessment 

-   MRI w/out contrast: used to evaluate soft tissues, tendons, muscle
    and bursae

-   Ultrasound: becoming more useful for initial evaluation of rotator
    cuff and bicepts tendon

+------------+-----------+---------------------------+----------------+
| Test       | Isolates  | Action                    | Positive if    |
+============+===========+===========================+================+
| Empty Can  | Supr      | Place arms at             | Pain =         |
| Test       | aspinatus | 80⁰ abduction,            | tendinopathy   |
|            |           | 30⁰ forward flexion and   |                |
|            |           | pronate hand with thumbs  | Weakness +     |
|            |           | down; exert downward      | pain = tear    |
|            |           | force at elbows           |                |
+------------+-----------+---------------------------+----------------+
| Neer sign  | Su        | Passively flex arm with   | Pain at        |
|            | bacromial | hand pronated (similar    | subacromial    |
|            | im        | to empty can)             | region         |
|            | pingement |                           |                |
+------------+-----------+---------------------------+----------------+
| Hawkins    | Su        | Flex arm to 90⁰, bend     | Pain at        |
| sign       | bacromial | elbow to 90⁰, and         | subacromial    |
|            | im        | internally rotate to 90⁰  | region         |
|            | pingement |                           |                |
+------------+-----------+---------------------------+----------------+
| External   | Infra     | Arms at side, flex 90⁰    | Weakness, pain |
| Rotation   | spinatus, | elbow, exert medial force |                |
|            | teres     | to distal forearm         |                |
|            | minor     |                           |                |
+------------+-----------+---------------------------+----------------+
| Lag sign   | Subs      | Place dorsum              | Pain or        |
| & Lif      | capularis | of hand on lumbar area of | failure to     |
| t-Off test |           | back and actively and     | per            |
|            |           | passively move hand off   | form indicates |
|            |           | of back                   | subscapul      |
|            |           |                           | aris pathology |
+------------+-----------+---------------------------+----------------+
| O'Briens   | SLAP tear | Flex shoulder to 90⁰ with | Pain and       |
|            |           | full elbow extension and  | clicking with  |
|            |           | adduct 15⁰. With shoulder | shoulder IR    |
|            |           | IR (thumb down), apply    | but not with   |
|            |           | downward pressure         | ER             |
|            |           | distally. With shoulder   |                |
|            |           | ER (palm up) apply same   |                |
|            |           | pressure                  |                |
+------------+-----------+---------------------------+----------------+
| Cross arm  | AC joint  | Active abduction of arm   | Pain à AC      |
| test       |           | across torso              | joint          |
|            |           |                           | dysfunction    |
+------------+-----------+---------------------------+----------------+
| Speed's    | Biceps    | Have pt extend arm        | Pain in the    |
| Test       | tendon    | in full supination with   | anterior       |
|            |           | the shoulder flexed. Ask  | shoulder       |
|            |           | pt to elevate arm while   |                |
|            |           | applying downward force   |  Biceps tendon |
|            |           |                           | pathology      |
+------------+-----------+---------------------------+----------------+
| Yergason   | Bicepts   | Elbow at 90⁰ and resist   | Pain in        |
| test       | tendon    | supination                | anterior       |
|            |           |                           | shoulder       |
+------------+-----------+---------------------------+----------------+
| Ap         | GHJ       | With pt supine, place arm | Feeling of     |
| prehension |           | in 90⁰ shoulder           | instability    |
| test       |           | abduction, elbow flexion  | anteriorly.    |
|            |           | and ER                    | Will not all   |
|            |           |                           | full ER        |
+------------+-----------+---------------------------+----------------+

Management

-   Fractures: require assessment by Orthopedics for reduction and
    surgical intervention

-   Brachial plexopathy: Send for EMG, evaluation by PM&R

-   Tendon/ligament injuries, arthritis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Conservative management: Refer to PT for muscle strengthening,
    flexibility, and postural improvement

-   Consider short course of NSAIDs, 7-10 days (meloxicam, diclofenac)
    for pain relief

-   Injections can often be diagnostic and therapeutic -- refer to PM&R
    or Orthopedics

-   Refer to Orthopedics for interventional/surgical evaluation if pt
    fails conservative therapy

Procedures

Editor: Kate Heckman, MD

Reviewed by Garren Montgomery, MD

Adapted from Procedure Service Guidebook by Tyson Heller, MD

Procedure Service Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UfYmVX8llZk

Making an ultrasound note: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jIqHOyze2T4

Consent

-   When printing consent forms at VUMC, use MedEx (on the virtual
    machine/desktop)

-   Telephone consent requires second physician as witness

-   Use CSN (not the MRN) to locate the pt information for that specific
    admission or office visit -- ensure pt current room number on MedEx
    screen

-   When consenting parients at NAVA, use the COW with pen pad and the
    IMed Consent forms

-   Informed consent video guide:
    <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6yXOEkFqk2o>

Anticoagulation and Bleeding Risk

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Anticoagulant                     How Long to Hold
  --------------------------------- -------------------------------------
  Heparin gtt                       4-8 hours, ensure PTT wnl

  LMWH                              12-24 hours

  Dabigatran (Pradaxa)              1-2 days

  Apixaban (Eliquis)                1-2 day

  Rivaroxaban (Xarelto)             1-2 days

  Warfarin (Coumadin)               5-7 days
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Platelets, INR cutoffs: refer to individual procedure sections for
procedure-specific guidelines

Anesthesia and Sedation

-   May be used when pain or anxiety may impede performance and success

-   Relative contraindications: old age, dementia, respiratory
    difficulty

-   Aim to use local anesthesia with l% to minimize procedural sedation

-   Creating wheal: Clean surface with chlorhexidine or alcohol swab.
    With 22-25G needle, advance needle nearly parallel to skin and
    aspirate to ensure no blood vessel involved, then inject anesthetic
    to create 1-2 cm of raised skin. If deeper subcutaneous anesthesia
    is needed, advance needle perpendicular to skin, aspirate as
    advancing then inject the tract and inject anesthetic as needle is
    withdrawn

-   Local anesthesia can alter landmarks, always double check anatomy
    after injection

-   Minimal sedation: 0.25mg-2mg Ativan IV or 1mg-2.5mg Midazolam IV

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Midazolam (Versed): faster on (2-5 min) and faster off (30-60 min)

-   Lorazepam (Ativan): onset 5-10 min; Duration 4-8 hours

Arterial Line

NEJM video Guide:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8hK04ai17-k&list=PLaxEyg3FbHI8x5IQMWD0qtbXEzN5RdIKM&index=3

Indications

-   Continuous, accurate hemodynamic monitoring (e.g. vasopressor
    titration, BP accuracy)

-   Need for frequent ABGs

Contraindications

-   Abnormal Allen\'s test, thrombosis of selected site, distorted
    anatomy at selected site (known prior fistulas, grafts,
    malformations), severe PAD at selected site, Raynaud\'s of selected
    limb

Consent

-   Bruising, pain, damage to adjacent structures, infection, bleeding
    (possible extension to RP bleed with femoral placement), hematoma
    formation, vascular complications (dissection, AV fistula,
    pseudoaneurysm), thrombosis, rarely distal ischemia

Pre-procedural considerations

-   **Bleeding risk guidelines:** no definitive guideline (suggest plts
    \> 50K, INR \< 3, PTT \< 100)

-   Allen Test if placing radial artery access to assess collateral
    ulnar blood flow. Compress both radial and ulnar artery 10-15 sec to
    allow blanching of palm, then release ulnar artery to assess
    re-perfusion. If blanching quickly resolves, ulnar artery will allow
    distal perfusion.

-   Radial access: ensure wrist is adequately extended; can use towel
    roll under wrist or tape hand

-   Discuss with fellow prior to brachial a-line placement

-   Ask RN to prepare tubing and waveform monitoring prior to time-out

Procedural considerations

-   Types of Kits

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Arrow kit: all-in-one device that has arterial catheter over
    introducer needle

-   A-line kit: individual introducer needle, guidewires, and sutures;
    multiple steps

-   Micropuncture kit: atraumatic guidewire, microcatheter and
    introducer sheath

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Reconfirm location with US after lidocaine

-   Ensure arterial access (pulsatile flow of bright red blood)

Post- procedural considerations

-   Immediately connect pressure tubing to catheter while maintaining
    sterile technique

-   Observe monitor for arterial waveform to verify appropriate
    placement

-   If persistent bleeding, hold pressure for 15 mins

Central Line

NEJM video guide: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qeVdRCqy_mo

Indications

-   Extracorporeal therapies: HD, CRRT, Plasma (PLEX) or RBC exchange
    transfusion

-   Venous access for: vasopressors, chemotherapy, parenteral nutrition,
    hemodynamic monitoring (CVP, ScvO2) cardiac parameters (via PA
    catheter), inadequate peripheral access

Relative contraindications

-   Increased bleeding risk, anatomic distortion at site selection,
    indwelling vascular hardware (pacemaker, HD access), vascular injury
    proximal to site, skin infection overlying selected site

Consent

-   Immediate complications: bleeding, malposition, arterial puncture,
    arrhythmia, pneumo- or hemothorax, air embolism, damage to
    surrounding structures (nerves, thoracic duct)

-   Delayed complications: infection, thromboembolism, myocardial
    perforation, venous stenosis

Pre-procedural considerations

-   Bleeding risk guidelines: Plts \> 20k, INR \< 3

-   All pts need to have telemetry & pulse oximetry monitoring

-   With every pt, consider LENGTH, LOCATION, LUMENS, and LINE TYPE!

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Central Line        Recommended Length (for pt height \>5'5")
  ------------------- ---------------------------------------------------
  Right IJ or         15 cm
  Subclavian          

  Left IJ or          20 cm
  Subclavian          

  Femoral             25 cm

  \*Confirm length of 
  catheter in your    
  kit before you      
  open/place the      
  line!               
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Type of Line   Uses                          Special Considerations
  -------------- ----------------------------- ---------------------------
  Triple Lumen   Central access for            Consider lumens needs;
  (7Fr)          vasopressors, caustic         triple lumen is most
                 infusions                     versatile but can warrant
                                               dual lumen

  MAC or         'Short and fat' allowing      MAC is placed with dilator
  Cordis\*       rapid transfusion; MAC has    still in introducer
                 two parts and can float a PA  
                 catheter through it           

  Dialysis       Dialysis line with two 12 Ga. Two serial dilations
  Catheter       Lumens for dialysis with a    
  (Trialysis, 12 third 17 Ga. lumen for added  
  Fr)            access                        

  \*Can place                                  
  triple lumen                                 
  in MAC for                                   
  additional                                   
  ports; lose                                  
  ability to                                   
  rapidly                                      
  transfuse                                    
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Site               Advantages                  Disadvantages
  ------------------ --------------------------- ------------------------
  Internal Jugular   Minimal risk of PTX;        Risk of carotid
  Vein               improve target with         puncture, difficult in
                     positioning and use of US;  obese pt; vein
                     easily compressible if      collapsibility with
                     bleeding occurs             hypovolemia

  Subclavian         More comfortable for pts;   Increased risk of PTX,
                     landmark driven approach;   harder to control
                     lowest risk infection       bleeding with pressure,
                                                 technically more
                                                 difficult

  Femoral            Easiest to access, no risk  
                     of PTX, can be placed       
                     during CPR and intubation   
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Procedural considerations

-   Cap side ports with blue claves (not included in Trialysis kit)
    prior to flushing

-   For IJ access, place pt in slight Trendelenburg position to engorge
    vein

-   While advancing needle, ensure constant negative pressure with
    aspiration of plunger and visualization of needle tip with US

-   Designate someone to watch tele while threading guidewire to monitor
    for arrhythmias. Limit guidewire insertion depth to no more than 16
    cm to reduce arrhythmia risk

-   Always ensure guidewire is secured while it is inside a vein

-   Always ensure target for venous cannulation is visualized and
    guidewire is placed correctly prior to dilation: 1) Compression of
    target vessel 2) Non-pulsatile dark blood return (unless on
    100%FiO2, may be brighter red) 3) US visualization or needle and
    wire 4) can use pressure tubing and angiocath to confirm CVP or
    obtain venous O2 sat

Post-procedural considerations

-   Every IJ or subclavian central line needs a confirmation CXR to
    confirm no PTX

-   Ideal placement of distal tip: in SVC just outside the right atrium,
    approximately near/ superior to carina and right tracheobronchial
    angle

-   Troubleshooting complications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Arterial Access or puncture: immediately remove needle and hold
    pressure for 15 mins to prevent hematoma formation; if uncontrolled
    bleeding or artery was dilated, STAT Vascular Surgery consult

-   Bleeding: place direct pressure; subclavian access precludes ability
    to compress and confers highest bleeding risk; if uncontrolled, STAT
    Vascular Surgery consult

-   Pulmonary complications: if free air aspirated into syringe,
    consider PTX vs. poor seal of syringe and needle. STAT CXR. If rapid
    deterioration, needle decompression and chest tube placement
    required

-   Venous air embolism: Can occur if air introduced to system during
    placement, flushing, or if left open to the atmosphere. If
    suspected, place pt in left lateral decubitus position to trap air
    in right apex and place pt on 100% O2 to speed resorption

-   Arrhythmia: Immediately withdraw wire to lesser depth. If arrythmia
    persists, abort procedure, treat pt, and determine cause.

Lumbar Puncture

NEJM video guide: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xnH9gECy_wU

Indications

-   Diagnosis of suspected CNS infections, CNS malignancies,
    demyelinating diseases, IIH, NPH, autoimmune encephalitis, suspected
    SAH with negative imaging

Absolute Contraindications

-   Increased intracranial pressure with risk of herniation (e.g.
    space-occupying lesions, cerebral edema, obstructive hydrocephalus),
    infection or epidural abscess over puncture site, trauma to lumbar
    vertebrae

Relative Contraindications

-   ↑ intracranial pressure, thrombocytopenia, bleeding diatheses

Consent

-   Common risks: back pain (\~66%), severe headache

-   Rare risks: spinal hematoma (\<0.001%), weakness, radicular
    pain/numbness, bleeding, brain function problems, CNS infection,
    brain herniation

Pre-procedural considerations:

-   **Bleeding risk guidelines:** Plts \> 50k, INR \< 1.6 (stricter
    guidelines d/t spinal hematoma risk)

-   CT head not generally needed prior to LP to rule out mass lesion;
    consider if presence of focal neurologic signs, papilledema, recent
    seizure, or immunocompromise

-   Consider sending to fluoro-guided if: attempts without imaging are
    unsuccessful, obese pts with no palpable anatomy, severe scoliosis,
    prior spine surgery, borderline low plts and multiple sticks might
    be needed, or pt requires heavy sedation

-   Labs: cell count w/diff, BF culture, glucose, protein; freeze sample
    for future/additional labs (order in Epic); if infectious or
    neurological labs are needed, consider consult first

-   Ensure lateral decubitus position for opening pressure with glass
    pressure manometer

Procedural considerations

-   US Probe: linear (can use curvilinear in obese pts) in transverse
    axis to establish midline and in sagittal axis to identify spinous
    processes

-   Anesthetic use: lidocaine 1-2% (likely need more than what is
    provided in kit; consider empiric anesthetization of 2 spaces ±
    Pain-Ease spray

-   Higher rate of success if stylet is removed before entering
    subarachnoid space to better observe flow of CSF once in the
    subarachnoid space. Stylet should be replaced prior to LP needle
    removal

-   Aspiration of CSF = increased risk of bleeding. Don't aspirate!

-   Volume removal for studies: Basic only 2mL per tube in 1-4. Many
    studies ordered: 3mL per tube (\*consider calling lab to confirm).
    Cytology desired: call lab to confirm amount needed (rule of thumb
    2/2/6/2mL); Tube 4 is sent for micro to reduce contamination.
    Therapeutic high volume: 30mL max

Post-procedural considerations

-   Post-LP headache (\~10%): encourage pt to lay flat to reduce the
    intensity of symptoms (but does not prevent it); if prolonged,
    consider blood patch (consult Anesthesia)

-   Neuro changes OR bleeding complications: STAT non-contrast MRI
    lumbar spine for epidural hematoma, consult Neurosurgery, q1
    neuro-checks x4hrs then q2 for 24-48hr

-   Resuming anticoagulation: 1h UFH, 4h LMWH, 6-8h
    rivaroxaban/apixaban, 6h dabigatran/fondaparinux. Longer periods
    should be considered after traumatic tap, and post-procedure
    monitoring of neurological function is recommended for all pts

Dobhoff Tube

Indications

-   Enteral feeding and medication administration if unable to swallow

-   DHT vs. NGT: DHT deliver meds and fluids, NGT provide suction to
    decompress (can also deliver meds/fluids); nurses place NGT,
    residents (and ICU nurses) place DHT

Relative contraindications

-   Esophageal varices or strictures (most hepatologists say this is not
    a contra-indication, but discuss if recent bleed or recent banding)

-   Other altered gastric anatomy that may prevent passage (e.g. gastric
    bypass, esophageal hernias, tumors or other possible obstructions)

-   SBO or ileus (use NGT instead for suction)

Absolute contraindications for blind approach

-   Facial trauma, basilar skull fracture, pharyngeal or esophageal
    trauma

Consent

-   Common risks: malposition (lung 🡪 PTX or PNA; pyriform sinus;
    coiling anywhere along tract), perforation anywhere along the tract,
    aspiration, nasal ulceration, esophagitis, gastritis, bleeding,
    vagal response, discomfort

Pre-procedural considerations

-   **Bleeding risk guidelines:** Plts \> 10k, no specific INR
    guidelines

-   Make sure DHT and bridle sizes correlate

-   Measure expected advancement depth by measuring distance from tip of
    nose, around ear, and to xiphoid process

-   Prior to placement, fasten the stylet in the fully-hubbed position
    to reduce bending and folding over of the weighted tip while
    advancing

-   Apply anesthetic with lidocaine gel (order Lidocaine uro-jet) and
    nasal swab to reduce pt discomfort, reduce gag reflex, and assist
    with clearance of the nasal passages

-   Consider fluoro-guided placement after 3 failed bedside attempts

-   Post-pyloric placement

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider in pts with high pulmonary aspiration risk, severe
    esophageal reflux/esophagitis, recurrent emesis, impaired gastric
    mobility, and pancreatitis

-   Refer for fluoro-guided post-pyloric advancement after 1 failed
    bedside attempt

Procedural Considerations

-   Have the pt sit upright with their head tilted toward the chest

-   Tip: advance horizontally (nose tip to ear lobe), not angled up

-   If pt can participate safely, have the pt swallow in conjunction
    with advancement.

-   Excessive coughing, difficulty phonating, or resistance may indicate
    tracheal placement. Withdraw tube and re-attempt. Consider Duonebs
    to reduce bronchospasms

-   Post-pyloric placement has been shown to be up to 90% successful
    with intermittent insufflation of 10-20cc of air \~every 10cm of
    advancement after 55cm to promote pylorus opening. IV Reglan or
    erythromycin may also help

-   When placing bridle (recommend AFTER xray confirmation), keep
    alignment markers (marked on both probes) together so magnetic tips
    will align once past the nasal septum

-   When placing the bridle, remove the green stylet housed within the
    white probe before retracting back and removing the white probe

Post-procedural Considerations

-   ALWAYS confirm position with KUB before medications are given

-   Insufflation of air and auscultation of bowel sounds over the
    gastric area can be reassuring of correct placement of DHT prior to
    taping/bridling and leaving the bedside

-   Most mispositioned/coiled tubes have to be removed and re-attempted,
    but it is ok to advance or withdraw if the stylet is still in place.
    However, once removed, a stylet should not be re-introduced to a
    mispositioned/coiled tube due to risk of GI perforation

-   In case of cranial placement, don't remove, consult Neurosurgery

-   De-clogging: Clog Zapper Kit (can type this into Epic directly);
    Coca cola

Paracentesis

Video Guide

-   VUMC Procedure Service video:
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pQSsb9705LE&t=160s

-   NEJM video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KVpwXK7cvzQ

Indications

-   Diagnostic: evaluation of new onset ascites or of known ascites with
    concern for SBP

-   Therapeutic: tense ascites, refractory to diuretics, causing pt
    discomfort

Relative Contraindications

-   Significant bowel distension due to ileus or SBO, hemodynamic
    instability (due to large fluid shifts with LVP), DIC,
    infection/breakdown of skin overlying puncture site

Consent

-   Risks: abdominal wall hematoma (1%), hemoperitoneum, organ puncture
    / bowel perforation, infection, ascitic fluid leak

Pre-procedural considerations

-   **Bleeding risk guidelines:** Plts \> 20k, INR \< 4 (cirrhosis
    complicates INR interpretation)

-   Number of bottles (can call the service center to request)

-   Labs: cell count w/diff, BF culture, BF and serum albumin, total
    protein; cytology if concerned for malignancy; BF/serum Hct if
    bloody

-   Measure skin/subQ depth with US to help choose sufficiently long
    needle

Procedural considerations

-   Ultrasound Probe: curvilinear

-   Identify safe pocket (\>2 cm deep), with no nearby bowel or
    adhesions. Avoid surgical scars. Attempt as lateral as possible to
    avoid inferior epigastric vessels.

-   Local anesthesia with lidocaine all the way to peritoneum, as this
    is most sensitive part

-   Kit: 6 Fr Safe-T-Centesis Kit; gather cx bottles, cx bottle syringe
    adaptor, specimen cup

-   If only diagnostic, use 18G needle with 20-50cc syringe rather than
    kit

-   If high bleeding risk, use long 18G needle & attach to syringe
    instead of 6 Fr. Catheter

-   If hernia present, have the pt reduce it while draining fluid to
    prevent incarceration

-   Inoculate culture bottles at bedside rather than sending fluid
    samples to lab for inoculation to increase yield 50% 🡪 80% (Note
    that VA does not allow bedside inoculation.)

Post-procedural considerations

-   Albumin (25%) for large volume (\>5L) removal: 8 g per liter
    removed, up to 50 g

-   Ascitic leak: can try skin glue or place 1 figure-of-eight stitch
    with 4.0 vicryl

-   Bleeding: Hold pressure with quick-clot and gauze for \>5-10 mins
    for persistent bleeding. STAT page EGS or IR if profuse bleeding or
    concern for organ injury

Thoracentesis

NEJM Video Guide: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ivTyH09BcHg

Indications

-   New pleural effusion that has no obvious explanation (not attributed
    to HF alone) or concern for pleural space infection

-   Any respiratory symptoms that would positively respond to large
    volume thoracentesis (\>1L)

Contraindications

-   Skin infection at needle insertion site

-   Large-volume thoracentesis in hepatic hydrothorax (tends to
    reaccumulate). Suspected unexpandable lung

Consent

-   Common risks (\> 5%): coughing, fainting, pneumothorax (PTX)

-   Rare risks (\< 1%): hemothorax, re-expansion pulmonary edema,
    liver/spleen puncture

Pre-procedural considerations

-   **Bleeding risk guidelines:** Plts \> 50k, INR \< 2 (risk/benefit
    evaluation outside these)

-   If loculations present on US, high risk, or any question about
    indication, consult Pulm

-   Labs: cell count w/diff; BF culture; BF and serum LDH, total protei,
    and Hct (if bloody); cytology if concerned for malignancy; consider
    triglycerides for chylothorax

Procedural considerations

-   US Probe: cardiac (or linear) to identify safe pocket (\>2 cm)
    between lung and diaphragm

-   Ask Interventional Pulm or IR if sample is needed of a smaller
    pocket

-   Kit: 6Fr Safe-T-Centesis kit

-   Upright position is typically preferred; lateral to mid-scap/mid-ax.
    If pt unable to sit upright, refer to Procedure Team or Pulmonology

-   Effusion size: if unable to tap above 9th rib, too small; CXR with
    costophrenic angle blunting should correlate to \~250-500mL

-   Insert needle superior to rib to avoid neurovascular bundle (bundles
    run below)

-   Stop if pt has any new/increased chest discomfort, aggressive
    unremitting cough, frank purulence or air on aspiration,
    lightheadedness, hypotension, or vagal response

-   Stop fluid removal after 1.5 L of chronic pleural effusion to reduce
    re-expansion pulmonary edema

Post-procedural considerations

-   If needing cytology, send at least 60 -- 100cc

-   Bleeding complication: STAT page Thoracic Surgery

-   PTX: If stable and asymptomatic, supplemental O2 and repeat CXR in
    4hrs. If unstable or symptomatic, STAT page to Thoracic Surgery

-   Re-expansion pulmonary edema: Persistent cough, frothy sputum.
    Diffuse GGO on side of thoracentesis. Supportive management (oxygen,
    monitor); most resolve in 24-48 hrs. If respiratory distress
    progresses, may need mechanical ventilation

-   Documentation: effusion US characteristics (anechoic, layering
    debris, septations), reason for ending procedure (stopped early due
    to chest discomfort, complication vs tapped dry), presence of lung
    sliding, if more than scant residual effusion remains post-procedure

-   A CXR after thoracentesis is no longer indicated for most
    asymptomatic, non-ventilated pts. Check lung slide with US in 2D and
    M-mode

US-Guided PIV

VUMC video Guide: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GQGhciB6TvM

Indications

-   Vascular access; large bore (16-18G) is optimal for blood
    transfusion and faster than central lines (except MAC/Cordis);
    preserves central access (important for ESRD pts)

Relative Contraindications

-   Infection over the site, severe bleeding diathesis

-   Avoid EJs unless have been trained due to airway compromise if
    extravasation occurs

Consent

-   Risks: arterial puncture, nerve irritation/damage, infection,
    infiltration, thrombus formation

Pre-procedural considerations

-   Bleeding risk guidelines: Plts \> 10k, no specific INR guidelines

-   Location selection: anuric AKI or ESRD--discuss with Nephrology,
    avoid limb with HD access

-   Target selection: Confirm venous choice with compressibility and
    lack of doppler flow. Should follow the rule of 2s: vein must be at
    least twice the diameter of the catheter being placed, should be no
    more than 2 inches in depth from the surface of the skin, and should
    have at least 2 inches of straight (non-tortuous) length

Procedural considerations

-   US Probe: Linear

-   Kit: IV start kit; ideally 18G needle

-   Anesthetic use: Consider EMLA

-   1st choice: basilic, cephalic veins; 2nd choice: brachial vein
    (caution adjacent artery)

-   Hold probe close to skin, holding probe far from the end allows too
    much movement

-   Start at 45° angle, use 45-45-90 rule to determine starting location
    (start as far from center of probe as the vessel is deep). Flatten
    angle once in the vessel to advance (\"walk\" your way through the
    vessel by repeatedly identifying needle tip in the lumen and
    advancing)

-   Going too shallow could use up too much catheter leaving nothing to
    put in the vein.

-   Going too steep can cause catheter kinking at the hub where it
    sticks out of the skin

-   Use both short axis and long axis views to ensure correct placement

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Short axis: vessel looks round like a target, helps to scout out the
    tip, and is best for ensuring the vein is entered as opposed to a
    neighboring artery

-   Long axis: intended for the final few mm of catheter advancement
    into the vein to ensure both bevel and plastic sheath lumen traverse
    the endothelial layer before threading catheter

Post-procedural considerations

-   Don't forget to remove tourniquet. Remove before flushing to prevent
    blowing vein.

-   Bleeding complication: if arterial, remove catheter and hold
    pressure at least 5 mins

Post-Procedural Care - Terra Swanson

**Liver Biopsy**

-   Percutaneous Liver Bx (transabdominal approach)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Patient have some abdominal pain that day and/or referred pain to
    the shoulder. Should improve by next day. Treat with pain medicine
    PRN. Avoid Toradol.

-   Main risk is bleeding/hemoperitoneum. No routine follow up labs
    unless clinical concern for bleeding. If concerned, order stat H/H,
    call IR to discuss whether a triple phase CTA abdomen (noncontrast,
    arterial and venous phases) is warranted to look for active
    bleeding.

-   Wound care: will just have a bandaid, can come off in 24 hrs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Transjugular Liver Bx (Neck, right internal jugular approach):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Monitor right neck access for signs of hematoma. Transjugular
    biopsies have lower risk of bleeding but still possible, follow
    reccs as above if clinical concern. No routine labs.

-   If gauze/Tegaderm present, this can be removed after 24 hrs and
    replaced with another bandage until skin nick heals.

-   If dermabond present, leave intact and advise pt to not remove
    dermabond (it will fall off on its own).

**TIPS (transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt)**

-   Please ensure hepatology consult if not admitted to hepatology
    service after primary TIPS placement.

-   Typically right IJ small incision access. Monitor for hematoma

-   Patients often get a paracentesis intra-op if ascites is present,
    typically get albumin intra-op if \>5L were drained

-   Main post op concerns:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Abdominal and/or neck pain to be expected post-TIPS. Monitor for
    increasing abdominal distention or neck hematoma.

-   Hypotension can occur s/p TIPS. Consider albumin and IVF. If vitals
    not responding, obtain H/H and trend, touch base with IR to evaluate
    for risk of bleeding. If CT is warranted to eval for active
    bleeding: order a triple phase CTA abdomen/pelvis (noncontrast,
    arterial and venous phases).

-   Monitor for signs of HE (hepatic encephalopathy) as more blood is
    being diverted away from liver and thus not being properly cleared
    of toxins. Pt may need to initiate lactulose if HE develops

-   Monitor for signs heart failure after TIPS, usually they have a
    pre-op echo to assess for risk

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Routine post-op LFTS typically not necessary as LFTs expected to be
    elevated immediately after TIPS, unless there is another clinical
    indication to check them.

-   Most patients can be discharged POD1 if no issues. Pt will have
    follow-up coordinated in IR at 1 month with a follow-up TIPS
    ultrasound around that time. Pt should also have follow-up with
    their hepatologist.

**Post Renal Biopsy Monitoring and Complications (VUMC & VA)**

-   Routine monitoring:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   All pts are observed overnight in the hospital 

-   Strict bed rest for 8 hrs following procedure followed by bed rest
    with bathroom privileges.

-   Transplant bx: an abd binder with tennis ball is placed for 10
    minutes post biopsy 

-    (NOTE: this must be removed promptly to avoid compression
    injury/ATN) 

-   Frequent vital signs (q15 min x 4, q30 min x 4, q1h x 4, then q4h)
    You must inform the VA resident and preferentially the nurse at the
    VA who will be caring for your patient of these orders.  

-   Serial hct evaluation (at 0h, 4h, 8-12h, 18-24h) 

-   Serial urine collection x 3(to assess for gross hematuria) 

-   Do NOT give SQ heparin (i.e., DVT prophylaxis), anti-platelet
    agents, or anticoagulating agents for 2 weeks post biopsy. 
    If pt develops life threatening illness requiring anti-coagulation
    (e.g., ACS, DVT, PE) during this period, the renal fellow and
    attending should be notified immediately. 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-     Clinical signs and symptoms of post-biopsy complication: 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   SBP [\<]{.underline}100, HR [\>]{.underline}120 or worsening
    hypertension from Page Kidney 

-   Gross hematuria 

-   Moderate or severe pain at biopsy site  

-   New onset of abd pain or loin pain 

-   Evidence of bleeding (decrease in hct, increase
    in abd girth, abd/back ecchymosis) 

> ![Text Box](media/image35.png){width="1.646616360454943in"
> height="0.18089566929133857in"}![A diagram of a medical procedure
> Description automatically
> generated](media/image36.png){width="2.02919728783902in"
> height="1.5386220472440946in"}

-   Management of complications: 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bed rest

-   Pain control 

-   Fluid resuscitation (for gross hematuria, "clot colic") 

-   Maintenance of normal coagulation  

-   Imaging (renal ultrasound or CT scan of abd/pelvis) CT scan with
    contrast is better for visualizing extravasation. Discuss imagining
    type with your attending and maybe IR/Trauma.

-   Transfusion of blood products 

-   Coil embolization by IR 

-   Surgical exploration or nephrectomy 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Protocol for management of post biopsy complications: 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Renal fellow on call should be notified with a decrease in hct \>3%
    pts, new or severe pain, significant hemodynamic changes
    (tachycardia or low or high blood pressure), or with any other
    significant post bx complication.  The renal fellow or attending
    should help coordinate all consults and/or transfers.   

-   \*\*Remember that if there is an acute bleed the hematocrit may be
    unchanged. In this setting tachycardia and blood pressure will be
    the first sign of a bleed.  

-   Ensure type and screen current; have cross matched blood available
    (if necessary); obtain serial hct checks and check frequent vital
    signs.  

-   If appropriate, transfer pt to unit with higher level of care.  Pts
    with significant bleeding should be transferred to the **Trauma
    ICU** for management of penetrating renal trauma.  Consultation of
    Interventional Radiology, Trauma Surgery, or Transplant surgery (for
    transplant biopsies) should be considered. 

-   Nephrology (or Transplant Nephrology) attending on call and
    attending who performed biopsy should be notified of any
    complications immediately!  

     

Psychiatry

Editors: Ben Johnson, MD

Reviewed by Kristopher Kast, MD and David Marcovitz, MD

Medical Decision-Making Capacity -- Chelsea Sprick, Neil Phillips,
Jonathan Smith

Background

-   Capacity is a pt's ability to make a specific medical decision at a
    specific point in time

-   Can be assessed by any physician

-   Competency: "Global decision-making capacity," a legal determination
    made by a judge

Four key components to assess medical decision-making capacity

1.  Choice: Pt must clearly indicate a consistent choice

-   "Have you decided whether to follow the recommendation for the
    treatment?"

-   "Can you tell me what your decision is?"

2.  Understand: Pt must grasp the fundamental meaning of the information
    communicated by the medical team

-   "Please tell me in your own words what you were told about:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The problem with (1) your health now and (2) the recommended
    treatment

-   The risks/benefits of (3) treatment, (4) alternative treatments
    and (5) no treatment"

3.  Appreciate: the medical condition and likely consequences of
    treatment options

-   "What do you believe is wrong with your health now?"

-   "What is treatment likely to do for you?"

-   "What do you believe will happen if you're not treated?"

-   "Why do you think this treatment was recommended?"

4.  Reason: Pt must rationally manipulate relevant information

-   "What makes the chosen option better than the alternative?"

-   "How did you decide to accept or reject the recommended treatment?"

If the pt does not have medical decision-making capacity:

-   Identify and remedy cause of impairment if possible (if decision is
    non-urgent)

-   Identify surrogate decision maker

Documenting medical decision-making capacity:

-   Use a dot phrase .Capacity that lists the four components and
    document your thought process citing evidence from your interview

Medical Holds -- Soibhan Kelley

Background

-   6401 vs. 6404

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \"6401\": Process to detain someone who has a high likelihood of
    posing harm to themselves or others *due to mental illness*. Purpose
    is short-term detention until a prompt psychiatric assessment can be
    performed.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   One person completes this. Can be law enforcement officers,
    psychologists, physicians

-   Must document justification for why the hold is needed (progress
    note, assessment form, etc.)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \"6404\": 6404= Certificate of Need. Legal document used for
    emergency involuntary psychiatric admission

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pt must have a mental illness or serious emotional disturbance
    (excluding intellectual/developmental disabilities) and pose an
    immediate substantial likelihood of serious harm because of this
    based on a face-to face assessment by a qualified psychiatric
    professional

    -   Treatment is necessary for symptom reduction, and lack of
        treatment would lead to deterioration with no less drastic
        alternative to inpt hospitalization

-   Two certificates are needed---the first to transport a pt to a
    psychiatric facility and the second for an involuntary admission.

-   Two different qualified persons must each complete a form.

    -   Psychiatry residents can write these due to their special
        training licenses .

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   No AMA Medical Hold: used when a pt does not have capacity to leave
    the hospital against medical advice *due to a medical condition* and
    needs to remain in the hospital

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can be ordered by any physician🡪 Medical Hold Order Set

VUH specific procedures

-   A physical copy of the first 6404 is required to accompany the pt
    when he/she is transported to a psychiatric facility after medical
    discharge. The form is completed by the psychiatry team.

Navigating "Difficult" Pt Interactions -- Katherine Termini and Jonathan
Smith

Background

-   Between 15-60% of pt-physician interactions are considered
    "difficult" by the physician. Pts in these interactions also often
    report dissatisfaction, feeling unheardor uncared for.

-   Pts want to feel their unique perspective is understood by their
    team, even if that perspective differs from the team. Reaching this
    understanding can often resolve conflict.

-   Difficult pt interactions increase the risk for physician burnout.

-   It is important to note that most difficult interactions are not due
    to psychiatric illness.

    Communication Tips

-   When a pt has very strong affect towards you, try not to take this
    personally as it is rarely related to you specifically.

-   Remain calm and unflappable while in the room, even if the pt is
    upset. Focus on breathing deeply and pause before speaking.

-   Attempt to identify and verbally reflect the pt's emotional state.

-   Understand that you cannot reason someone out of something he/she
    was not reasoned into

-   Minimize blaming and "you" statements

-   Acknowledge that being in the hospital is hard work for the pt, and
    the team wants to work with the pt toward a common goal.

-   Acknowledge that the interaction/relationship is less than ideal and
    how that may be impacting their care.

-   Assist a pt in revising unrealistic expectations by providing
    education, but always keep the reason for their expectations at the
    center (refusing a procedure due to fear of death or feeling out of
    control).

-   Indicate the pt's own role and responsibilities in their
    care---highlight the things that they have direct control over.

    Angry Pts: The 5 A's

-   Acknowledge the problem and pt's anger

-   Allow the pt to vent uninterrupted

-   Agree on what the root problem is

-   Affirm what can be done to address this problem

-   Assure follow-through

-   That said, prioritize safety of pts and staff. If the pt is
    escalating to physical agitation, defer negotiations to a later
    time. Do not stay in the room if you feel that your physical safety
    is in danger or if the pt is being verbally assaultive. You never
    need the pt's permission to leave the room.

    Splitting

-   A coping mechanism by which a pt views others as either good or bad
    without middle ground

-   This often manifests as different team members having different
    types of interactions with the pt or hearing different things from
    the pt. The pt may idealize some team members and villainize others.

-   If possible, have all team members (primary, consultants, bedside
    nurse) meet with the pt at the same time.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Alternatively, have all treatment plans be delivered by one central
    person (primary resident) with bedside nurse present

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Provide pt a written summary of this plan.

-   Find ways to make small, reasonable concessions that give the pt
    more control over their care and day-to-day experience (e.g.
    shifting the timing of medications).

-   Set clear expectations and boundaries (e.g. team will terminate
    discussion and leave the room if the pt begins cursing at them) and
    follow-through on them

-   When feeling stuck, consulting the psychiatry consultation liason
    service can help address psychiatric factors that may be
    contributing or can play a mediating role

Agitation Management -- Jonathan Constant, Jonathan Smith

Background

-   Agitation in the hospital results from discomfort, illness,
    medication effects, and/or frustrations the pt is unable to
    meaningfully communicate

Presentation

-   Impulsive aggression: spontaneous, explosive, reactive/reflexive,
    not pre-meditated

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Delirium, psychosis, cognitive deficits, withdrawal/intoxication,
    pain, post-ictal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Instrumental aggression: pre-meditated, controlled, purposeful
    behaviors

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Personality disorders, secondary gain, delusional thought

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Differential diagnosis for aggression

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Psychoses: mania, depression, schizophrenia, delusional disorder

-   Personality disorder: antisocial, borderline, paranoid, narcissistic

-   Substance use disorder: alcohol, PCP, stimulants, cocaine,
    synthetics

-   Delirium, dementia

-   Frontal lobe syndromes (TBI, CVA, neoplasm, neurodegenerative
    process)

-   Behavior/developmental: intermittent explosive, intellectual
    disability

Evaluation

-   Examine (when calm) for source of pain, infection, discomfort (e.g.
    urinary retention or constipation), toxidromes

-   Neurological exam for focal deficits, ataxia, nystagmus, tremor,
    rigidity, aphasias

-   Review medication list and perform med reconciliation of home meds

-   UDS and review of CSMD for evaluation of intoxication/withdrawal

-   CBC, CMP, UA

-   CT head + EEG if focal neurologic deficits

Management

-   Environment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Periodic room searches; search personal belongings, VUPD presence if
    warranted

-   Virtual or 1:1 sitter placement

-   Delirium precautions (see delirium section)

-   Disposable trays and utensils (minimize potential weapons in the
    room)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   De-escalation: always first line, although impractical if pt is
    unable to communicate effectively, is explosive, or already engaging
    in violent/potentially harmful behavior

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Nonverbal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Maintain safe distance, avoid sudden movements, don\'t touch the pt

-   Maintain neutral posture, neutral, sincere eye contact, same height

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Verbal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Speak in calm, clear tone, avoid confrontation, and offer to solve
    problem if possible

-   Do not insist on having the last word

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tactics

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Redirection: Acknowledge pt's frustrations; shift focus on how to
    solve the problem

-   Aligning goals: Emphasize common ground and big picture; make small
    concessions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Restraints

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Should be used only when necessary to protect pt or others from harm

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mechanically restrained pts cannot be left unmonitored

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   De-escalate (4 point to 2 point, etc) and remove restraints as soon
    as possible

-   Documentation of restraint

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Face-to-face assessment has to be completed within an hour of
    violent restraint

-   "Restraint Charting" tab, typically in rarely used tab drop down

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mechanical Restraints

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Soft restraints: Most commonly used

-   Hard restraints: Reserved for severe behavioral health (only 2 sets
    in house)

-   Mittens

-   Posey Vest: prevents exiting bed, allows limbs to be free

-   Posey Bed: wandering pt (TBI, severe dementia)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   VUMC Orders: "Restraint" 🡪 order set

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-violent non-self-destructive (order lasts up to 48 hrs)

    -   Most pts needing restraint: Non-psychiatric, delirium, dementia,
        intubation

-   Restraint violent self- destructive adult

    -   Order lasts up to 24hr with assessment every 4 hours

    -   Mainly severe psychiatric symptoms

Pharmacological Management for Agitation

As discussed above, behavioral interventions are first line for
agitation management in the hospital. Pharmacologic treatment should
only be used when needed for pt and/or staff safety when
non-pharmacologic interventions are unsuccessful or impractical

Acute Agitation

-   Antipsychotics

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Widely effective for acute agitation, especially in delirium and
    psychotic disorders

-   Monitor EKG if repeated dosing or if used with other QT prolonging
    agents

-   Moderate agitation options:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Olanzapine 2.5 - 5mg po q6h PRN. Orally disintegrating tab (ODT)
    available

-   Quetiapine 12.5 - 25mg q6h PO PRN for pts at higher risk of
    extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Severe agitation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Haldol 0.5 - 1mg IV/IM q6h PRN for older/frail individuals

-   Haldol 2-3mg IV/IM q6h PRN for other pts

-   Titrate up to 5 mg and can increase frequency as warranted

-   When using IV Haldol obtain daily EKG, Mg and K levels

-   Stop IV Haldol if QTc \> 500 msec

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Benzodiazepines

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lacks EPS that can occur with antipsychotics but can worsen delirium
    and disinhibit pts with neurocognitive-related agitation

-   Can use alone or in addition to antipsychotic agent

-   Preferred for agitation related to intoxication or withdrawal of
    sedatives

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lorazepam preferentially used due to PO, IV and IM availability

-   Lorazepam 2mg PO/IM/IV q6h PRN typical starting dose (1mg if
    older/frail)

    -   Can increase frequency if warranted. Monitor for respiratory
        suppression

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If severe agitation is not responsive to the above, may require
    sedation with infusion:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dexmedetomidine, propofol or midazolam

Maintenance medications

-   Antipsychotics

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Reserve antipsychotics for severe aggression that pose significant
    risk and aim to wean as soon as safely possible

-   Adverse effects: Metabolic, EPS, increased mortality in dementia

-   Most commonly used: Olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Antiepileptic agents

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   May be effective in reduction of impulsive aggression

-   Most commonly used: Depakote

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Levetiracetam could worsen aggression/agitation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Beta blockers and alpha agonists

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Noradrenergic over-activity implicated in aggression expression

-   Commonly Used: Propranolol, clonidine, guanfacine

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Serotonergic agents: SSRI/SNRI/buspirone

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Useful if co-occurring depression/anxiety disorders

-   Peak onset of action takes weeks

Delirium -- Julian Raffoul, reviewed by Wesley Ely and Jo Ellen Wilson

Background

-   Definition: acute fluctuating disturbance of attention and awareness
    due to an underlying medical condition

-   Presentation: deficits in attention, orientation, or memory;
    hallucinations or delusions; sleep-wake disturbances; psychomotor
    changes (hyperactive, hypoactive, or mixed); language impairment;
    and/or emotional lability (agitation)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Think about the ABC's of Delirium

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Affect (anxiety, paranoia, irritability, apathy, mood shifts,
    personality changes)

-   Behavior (hallucinations, restlessness or agitation, psychomotor
    abnormalities, sleep disturbances)

-   Cognition (impaired memory, disorientation, disturbances in speech)

Evaluation

-   Use screening tools to assess for delirium: Brief Confusion
    Assessment Method (bCAM). See critical care section for the ICU
    version, CAM-ICU

-   Once delirium is diagnosed, evaluate for the underlying cause.
    Delirium has many etiologies and may occur alone or in combination
    (in \~10% of cases, no clear cause is found)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mnemonic for common causes of delirium:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   D: Drugs/toxins (use of benzodiazepines, opiates, anticholinergics,
    steroids, etc., withdrawal from ETOH, benzos, etc.)

-   E: Eyes/ears (sensory deficits)

-   L: Low perfusion states (MI, PE, heart failure, sepsis)

-   I: Infection

-   R: Retention (urine, stool)

-   I: Intracranial events (trauma, seizure, stroke, hemorrhage)

-   U: Undernutrition/dehydration

-   M: Metabolic, endocrine (Hypo or hyper Na, hyperCa, uremia, thyroid,
    hypoglycemia)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   See neurology chapter for approach to general AMS

    ![Diagram Description automatically
    generated](media/image37.png){width="2.070156386701662in"
    height="1.8227854330708662in"}

Management

-   Treat underlying cause as above

-   Assess for pain and treat appropriately

-   See critical care section for prevention in the ICU (ABCDEF bundle)

-   Ensure hearing aids, glasses, and dentures are available

-   Encourage mobilization

-   Review medications, eliminate sedatives and anticholinergics as able

-   Remove medical support devices as able (foley catheters, telemetry)

-   Provide clock, calendar, and appropriate lighting. Regular
    reorientation. Provide cues from a familiar environment (pictures,
    calls or visits from family members)

-   Maintain normal sleep-wake cycle. Keep lights on in the day and
    avoid excessive naps

-   Ensure adequate bowel regimen and hydration

-   There is no pharmacologic intervention known to prevent or treat of
    delirium. Reserve for agitation impairing pt safety when
    non-pharmacologic interventions alone are unsuccessful. See
    "Agitation" section for medication approach

Inpt Insomnia -- Julian Raffoul, Jose Alberto Arriola Vigo

Background

-   Sleep disturbances in the hospital are multifactorial.

-   Consequences of sleep disturbances include changes in cognition,
    behavior, anxiety, pain perception, respiratory function,
    inflammation, and metabolism.

-   Goals while inpt: Optimize sleep environment, minimize stimulating
    or sleep-related side effects of concomitant medications, utilize
    non-pharmacologic strategies

Management

-   Non-pharmacologic interventions:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Noise reduction: Ear protection, white noise, etc.

-   Keeps lights on during the day and off at night

-   Reducing nighttime interruptions: Retime VS checks and lab draws

-   Minimize devices and lines as able

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pharmacotherapy:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Minimize medications such as sedatives/hypnotics, opioids,
    glucocorticoids, beta blockers, and certain antibiotics that disturb
    sleep architecture

-   Melatonin: 1-5 mg PO QHS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   First-line choice based on mild side-effect profile, low potential
    for drug-drug interactions, and improves circadian rhythms; dose
    2-3hrs before bedtime

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Trazodone: 25-50 mg PO qhs (max 200 mg/day)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Side effects: Headache, dry mouth, and nausea

-   Monitor for orthostasis and infrequent atrial arrhythmias; use
    lowest effective dose

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mirtazapine: 7.5-15 mg PO QHS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   A primary alpha-2 antagonist with 5-HT2 and H1 antagonism

-   Consider when insomnia appears to be related to primary depression

-   Can increase appetite and cause weight gain

Additional Information

-   Avoid the following in the inpt setting

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Benzodiazepines

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Reduces sleep latency and increases total sleep time but avoided due
    to significant adverse effects: Respiratory depression, cognitive
    decline, delirium, daytime sleepiness, and falls, particularly in
    hospitalized older adults

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-benzodiazepines benzodiazepine receptor agonists (e.g.,
    zolpidem, eszopiclone/zopiclone, zaleplon)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Commonly used in the outpt setting but associated with cognitive
    dysfunction, delirium, and falls in hospitalized pts

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diphenhydramine

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Trials evaluating their effectiveness as sleep aids are limited and
    show mixed results

-   Many potential side effects that are enhanced in the inpt setting:
    Impaired cognition, anticholinergic effects (constipation, urinary
    retention)

Substance Use Disorder (SUD) -- Ben Johnson

Background

-   SUDs are common, complex, and chronic neuropsychiatric disorders
    with well-described inherited risk, dysregulated neurophysiology,
    and multiple effective treatment modalities

-   Patients with SUD face significant stigma, prior traumatic
    experiences in healthcare environments

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Using the term "abuse" undermines the disease model of addiction and
    perpetuates stigma

-   Person-centered, specific terminology: "Person with opioid and
    alcohol use disorders"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid the qualifier "Polysubstance." Instead, clarify specific
    diagnoses for each substance category

-   DSM 5 Criteria (same for most substance categories): Requires 2+
    criteria met in past year and the patient's use must cause
    clinically significant impairment and/or distress:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Loss of control: Larger amounts, longer time, ongoing use despite
    consequences, efforts/desire to reduce use

-   Physiologic changes: Tolerance, withdrawal (these 2 alone do not
    necessarily imply a disorder if they result from prescribed
    therapy), craving

-   Consequences: hazardous use, interpersonal problems, medical
    problems, failed role obligations, lost activities

Management

-   First priority in the inpatient medical setting is to identify and
    stabilize withdrawal states

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mitigate risks of severe sequelae (seizure, delirium)

-   Avoid unintended iatrogenic harm (e.g. opioid abstinence leading to
    lost tolerance and post-discharge overdose)

-   Avoid distress-driven AMA discharge (discrimination resulting from
    stigma)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider Addiction Psychiatry consultation for:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Management of complex withdrawal states

-   Substance use disorders and co-occurring psychiatric diagnoses

-   Assistance with risk stratification for discharge with PICC lines
    for outpatient antibiotics and/or people who continue to use illicit
    substances while hospitalized

-   Differentiation of pain requiring opioid therapy and opioid use
    disorder

-   Harm reduction resources

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If in the emergency room and not admitted, consult PA

Alcohol Use Disorder -- Ben Johnson

Background

-   50% of hospitalized patients drink alcohol. At-risk alcohol use is
    \>14 drinks/week or \>5 drinks in a sitting for men. For women and
    men \>65, 7 per week, \>4 per sitting.

-   Alcohol withdrawal onset occurs 6-12 hours after last drink, with
    90% having non-severe course. CIWA score \<10 at 24-48 hours
    indicates low risk of worsening symptoms

-   Risk of seizures greatest at 12-24 hrs, occurring in \~3% of
    patients

-   Risk of delirium greatest at 48-72 hrs, occurring in \~5%

-   Risk assessment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Risk factors: Prior seizures/delirium tremons (most significant risk
    factor), co-substance use (especially benzodiazepines), no abstinent
    days in past month, presenting BAL \>200, dysautonomia

-   CIWA protocol is appropriate for patients at low risk of severe
    withdrawal

-   For non-low risk patients, consider benzodiazepine/barbiturate load
    and standing taper

-   Prediction of Alcohol Withdrawal Severity Scale (PAWSS) can be used
    to stratify risk of complicated alcohol withdrawal (seizure and DT
    risk); 1 point per question:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Intoxicated in the previous 30 days?

-   Previous episode of withdrawal from alcohol?

-   Previous withdrawal seizures?

-   Previous delirium tremens?

-   Previous detoxification from alcohol?

-   History of blackouts?

-   Concurrent use of benzodiazepines or barbiturates in last 90 days?

-   Concurrent use of other recreational substances within the last 90
    days?

-   Positive BAL on admission?

-   Evidence of autonomic hyperactivity (tachycardia, diastolic HTN,
    diaphoresis, nausea)?

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PAWSS score of 4 or greater is also considered high risk for
    complicated withdrawal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indications for admission: prior severe withdrawal (withdrawal
    seizures or delirium), PAWSS score of 4 or greater, comorbidities
    (medical and psychiatric illness), pregnancy, significant impairment
    in social/occupational functioning, communication barriers, social
    barriers

Presentation

-   Acute intoxication: disinhibition, slurred speech, ataxia, nystagmus

-   Acute withdrawal: nausea, vomiting, anxiety, agitation, audio-visual
    and tactile hallucinations, headache, diaphoresis, fine motor tremor
    while arms and fingers outstretched, autonomic hyperactivity

-   Chronic heavy use: sequelae of chronic liver disease and
    malnutrition, including thiamine deficiency

-   Caine criteria for Wernicke's encephalopathy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   2 or more: (1) malnutrition, (2) ataxia, (3) oculomotor
    abnormalities, (4) AMS

Evaluation

-   Identify last use, quantity per day/week, other sedative-hypnotic
    use, history of withdrawal, social/occupational dysfunction, other
    toxic forms of alcohol compounds including methanol and ethylene
    glycol

-   Acute alcohol withdrawal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Labs: blood alcohol level, urine toxicology (+/- ethyl glucuronide
    to detect use in prior 3 days), BMP, CBC, LFTs (AST:ALT elevation
    2:1), CK and β - hCG

-   CIWA score quantifies severity, though subject to inflation by
    subjective symptoms

Management of Acute alcohol withdrawal

-   Diazepam-based protocols:

-   Include hold parameters throughout the duration of the load and
    taper (sedation and hypopnea) and discontinue further doses for
    emergent toxicity (dysarthria, ataxia, nystagmus)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Low risk patients: CIWA-based symptom-triggered protocol

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   eg: diazepam 20 mg po q1h for CIWA greater than 20 or if 15-19 for 2
    consecutive hours

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-low risk patients:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Load: Diazepam 20 mg q1h x3 doses followed by Diazepam 10 mg q4h PRN
    for first 24 hours to identify total diazepam requirement to achieve
    RASS score of 0

-   Taper: Schedule 20% taper per day from original 24-hour requirement
    divided into TID or QID dosing schedule

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-low risk patients with hepatic impairment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Substitute lorazepam (risk of long-acting accumulation)

-   Load: Lorazepam 2 mg q1h PO/IV x3 dose followed by Lorazepam 2 mg
    q4h + 1mg q4h PRN for the first 24 hours to identify total lorazepam
    requirement to achieve RASS score of 0

-   Taper: Schedule 20% taper per day from original 24-hour requirement
    divided into QID dosing schedule

-   DO NOT discontinue taper early (but do hold doses for toxicity) as
    abrupt discontinuation of a short acting agent can result in delayed
    lorazepam withdrawal seizure

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Phenobarbital-based protocols:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Benzodiazepine resistance: likely due to cross-tolerance between
    alcohol and benzodiazepines

-   Considerations:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   No reduction in CIWA after 60-80 mg of diazepam

-   No reduction of CIWA in 24 hours

-   Previous DTs or seizures

-   Concurrent use of benzodiazepines and alcohol

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Phenobarbital load

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   8-12 mg/kg (up to 15 mg/kg) divided into 3 doses 3 hours apart

-   Taper may or may not be necessary after initial weight-based load
    but may consider: 60-120 mg q4h on 2nd day, 30-60 mg q4h on 3rd day,
    and 30 mg on 4th day, then discontinue

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Special considerations

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Add folate, multivitamin, and electrolyte repletion

-   If \>2 Caine criteria, treat empirically for Wernicke's
    encephalopathy with high-dose IV thiamine (500 mg TID IV x 3-5 days)

-   Consider Addiction Psychiatry consultation for complex presentations

Long-term Management of Alcohol Use Disorder (AUD)

-   After withdrawal stabilization, engage the patient in discussion
    around use and educate on connection between use and presenting
    medical problems

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Refer to Motivational Interviewing section for further guidance

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pharmacotherapy (MAUD) should be discussed with all patients prior
    to discharge, and if interested, MAUD should be initiated regardless
    of abstinence goal

-   If patient does not have abstinence goal, harm reduction may be
    achieved through reduction in quantity and/or frequency of drinking

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Naltrexone and topiramate have evidence for non-abstinence outcomes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pharmacologic interventions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Naltrexone (cannot be on opioid agonist):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Need 7-10 days since last opioid before starting

-   25 mg x1 day, then titrate up to 50 mg daily; also available in q30d
    IM

-   Monitor liver enzymes; AST/ALT must be \< 3-5x ULN

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acamprosate

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Head-to-head, inferior to naltrexone (see COMBINE trial)

-   Contraindicated with creatinine clearance less than 30 mL/min; dose
    reduced when 30-60 mL/min

-   333 mg TID, titrating to 666 mg TID dosing

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Disulfiram

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infrequently used outside of extreme motivation (e.g. professional
    under monitoring); would not use outside of specialist care

-   Must abstain from alcohol \~2 weeks after last dose, given risk of
    disulfiram-ethanol reaction (DER), which can be fatal depending upon
    disulfiram and ethanol doses

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Topiramate

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Not FDA-approved for AUD, but has significant supporting evidence

-   Useful for individuals without abstinence goal

-   Titrate slowly over 8 weeks to 200-300 mg/d

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gabapentin

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Not FDA-approved for AUD, but with some evidence and national
    guideline recommendations; however, continuation after discharge
    from acute care many be affected by controlled substance
    classification

-   Useful for post-acute withdrawal anxiety, insomnia, or co-occurring
    neuropathy

-   Titrate to 900-1800 mg/d divided into TID dosing, monitoring for
    sedation

-   Risk of sedation/apnea if concomitant alcohol use, so recommend
    patient discontinue if alcohol relaps occurs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Additional psychosocial treatments effective for AUD include 12-step
    groups (AA, SMART Recovery), cognitive behavioral therapy, sober
    living facilities, family therapy, contingency management, and
    IOP/residential treatment.

-   Consultation with Addiction Psychiatry or General Psychiatry is
    available to support management of AUD

Opioid Use Disorder (OUD) -- Ben Johnson

Background

-   Standard of care is opioid stabilization with buprenorphine or
    methadone (in OUD) or other full agonist opioids (in chronic opioid
    therapy)

-   Methadone and buprenorphine can be ordered by any physician for
    inpatients; buprenorphine can also now be prescribed at discharge by
    any physician, though methadone for OUD must be dispensed directly
    from a federally regulated Opioid Treatment Program ("methadone
    clinic")

-   Maintenance agonist therapy should be offered to every patient, with
    preference for an "opt-out" approach (even for uninsured patients
    through state grant funding)

Presentation (Withdrawal)

-   Restlessness/psychomotor activation, anxiety, irritability, nausea,
    abdominal cramping, loose stool, diffuse musculoskeletal pain,
    chills, insomnia, yawning

-   Pupillary dilation, piloerection, tearing, nasal congestion,
    diaphoresis, restless legs

Evaluation

-   Due to the partial agonist mu-opioid effect of buprenorphine and
    high binding affinity, premature induction of buprenorphine in
    patients previously using full-agonist opioids rapidly induces a
    withdrawal state (precipitated withdrawal)

-   Clinical Opioid Withdrawal Scale (COWS): quantifies severity of
    opioid withdrawal and allows for safer buprenorphine inductions

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Approximates the mu opioid receptor availability to avoid premature
    induction and precipitated withdrawal in the setting of
    buprenorphine induction while also allowing for adequate treatment
    of withdrawal symptoms

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Asking about opioid exposure: "You're uncomfortable. I work with a
    lot of people in the hospital, and some come with regular exposure
    to opioids from a lot of different places (their doctors, friends),
    should we be treating any withdrawal for you?"

Medications for Opioid Use Disorder (MOUD) -- Ben Johnson

**Buprenorphine**

Background

-   Partial agonist at the mu opioid receptor with high binding affinity

-   Long half-life (24-36 hours) allows for daily dosing

-   TID dosing is more effective for acute pain (as the analgesic effect
    is shorter-lived)

-   OK to use in renal failure/HD; may reduce dose in hepatic injury or
    switch to monoptoduct buprenorphine (Child-Pugh Class C)

-   All non-pregnant patients should receive buprenorphine-naloxone
    (e.g. Suboxone) formulations to mitigate risk of diversion/injection

    Management

-   Induction:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   All opioid medication must be held 12+ hours prior to first
    buprenorphine dose (typically, this opioid-free period is overnight
    from 9 PM to 9 AM), and recorded COWS score \> 10 to mitigate risk
    of precipitated withdrawal

-   2-4 mg is given SL, monitoring for oversedation; additional 2-4 mg
    is given q1h up to a total of 12 mg in first day

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Only sedation or hypopnea should prevent a full 12 mg dose

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Typical starting dose: 12-16mg/day SL

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Maintenance:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   4-32mg SL daily; 16mg and above to suppress opioid use, 24 mg is
    sufficient in most cases

-   All patient on Suboxone must have a prescription at discharge and a
    follow-up appointment for continued outpatient treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   No DEA waiver required; any physician may prescribe buprenorphine
    for OUD at discharge

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute pain management in patients using buprenorphine:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   There is no contraindication to full-agonist opioid analgesia for
    breakthrough pain

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If the etiology of pts pain would require opioid therapy in a
    non-OUD patient, do not avoid opioids; these may be used safely in
    the hospital

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Peri-operative pain management: continue buprenorphine at reduced
    and split doses (4mg BID or TID); will prevent withdrawal and
    cravings, but NOT manage new pain

-   Post-operatively: Reduce opioid requirements and increase
    buprenorphine to home dose

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If buprenorphine was discontinued, will require induction procedure
    to avoid precipitated withdrawal

**Methadone**

Background

-   Full mu opioid agonist with additional NMDA-receptor activity

-   Better option for individuals who cannot tolerate the buprenorphine
    induction procedure or with significant chronic or escalating pain

-   Long half life: 12-36 hrs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Limit titration to 10mg/d q7d, to prevent dose-stacking and delayed
    overdose

-   eg: 40 mg po qd increased to 50 mg po qd for one week prior to
    further titration to 60 mg po qd

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Safe in renal failure; dose reduction for hepatic injury

-   Potential for QT prolongation at higher doses, warrants QTc
    monitoring

    Management

-   Induction:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In the hospital, start at 10 mg TID, holding doses for sedation or
    hypopnea

-   Lower doses if concerned for respiratory compromise or concurrent
    CNS depressant therapy

-   First dose cannot exceed 30 mg, and no more than 40 mg in first 24
    hours; then titrate 5 mg/d q3d while admitted

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Federally regulated titration limits

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Maintenance:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Must confirm dose with methadone clinic before restarting outpatient
    dose

-   Until then, do not give more than initial doses (30 mg in single
    dose, 40 mg in first 24 hours)

-   After confirming home dose, continue as single daily dose or divide
    if patient is experiencing an acute pain generator or has a medical
    reason for induction of metabolism (eg pregnancy may require split
    dosing in the 2^nd^/3^rd^ trimester; medication interactions may
    have similar effects or require dose reduction if metabolism is
    inhibited)

**Naltrexone**

-   Mu opioid antagonist

-   Half-life oral \~4 hours but clinically active \~24 hrs

-   IM maintains clinically effective levels up to 30 days (not
    available for inpatient administration)

-   Only IM formulation is evidence-based to prevent return-to-use of
    illicit opioids, though PO formulation can be useful to introduce
    medication

-   Can precipitate withdrawal

-   Requires 7-10 days opioid abstinence prior to initiation

-   If due for monthly injection while admitted, may substitute oral
    formulation (50mg po qd) until discharged to outpatient provider to
    receive injection

Additional Information

-   Psychosocial Interventions that complement MOUD:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider referral to SUD counseling, mutual help (self-help,
    12-step, AA), intensive outpatient, and short- or long-term
    residential treatment

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Use of other drugs NOT a contraindication to MOUD; however, should
    encourage abstinence from other drugs during therapy (especially
    benzodiazepines)

-   Prescribe intranasal naloxone for overdose prevention to all OUD
    patients discharging from hospital, regardless of MOUD status

Tobacco Use Disorder (TUD) -- Ben Johnson

Background

-   All patients should be screened for nicotine use (smoking, chewing,
    and vaping of nicotine containing products)

-   Nicotine withdrawal is one of the most common reasons that patients
    leave the hospital before medically advised

-   Hospitalized patients receiving pharmacotherapy for nicotine use
    have higher rates of cessation

    Management

-   Combination therapy is superior to single therapy alone

-   Basal:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Transdermal nicotine patch provides sustained levels of nicotine

-   \> 10 cigarettes (1/2 pack) per day: 21 mg patch

-   \< 10 cigarettes (1/2 pack) per day: 14 mg patch

-   Remove overnight, abnormal dreams and nightmares are a common if not
    removed

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bolus

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gum/ Lozenge provides immediate nicotine for breakthrough cravings

-   First cigarette within 30 minutes of waking: 4 mg gum/lozenge

-   First cigarette after 30 minutes of waking: 2 mg gum/lozenge

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Patients smoking 1+ packs per day will likely still require 4 mg
    gum/lozenge

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Order q1h prn as patients will titrate utilization as they would
    with their outpatient nicotine use

-   Chew and park method for nicotine gum; sublingual absorption needed
    to bypass first metabolism

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other medications

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Varenicline

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Equivalent efficacy to combination NRT for smoking cessation

-   Limited utility in the inpatient setting due to side effect
    tolerability and need for dose titration over multiple days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bupropion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Effective but less efficacious than combination NRT and varenicline

-   Limited utility in the inpatient setting due to dose titration over
    a week and delay in steady state blood levels

-   Contraindicated in those with seizure disorder and those at risk of
    seizures

Motivational Interviewing -- Laura Artim and Ben Johnson

Background

-   Motivational interviewing: an evidence-based form of
    patient-centered interviewing that strives to align with patient's
    own strengths to encourage change in behavior via strengthening
    their own motivation for change

-   For inpatients, MI is most useful for encouraging medication
    adherence before discharge or substance use cessation as well as
    healthier lifestyle habits

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Assumptions/principles:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Only is in state of ambivalence, whether outwardly expressed or not

-   Ambivalence is expressed with conflict between multiple courses of
    action

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Patient 's intrinsic motivation to change may fluctuate at any given
    time, some patients may benefit from explaining this model of
    behavior change

-   Techniques to identify ambivalence:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Focus on reasons to change (\"why\") as opposed to specific actions
    (\"how\")

-   Express empathy: discussion about values, hopes, emotions, and goals
    surrounding behavior. Don't shy away from verbalizing strengths you
    recognize in patient

-   Empower self-efficacy: ask about other times they have made changes
    in life

-   Develop discrepancy between current and desired behavior through
    reflection and summaries such as "I'm hearing that drinking helps
    you relax, but I'm also hearing that you are worried about its
    impact on your health"

-   Avoid argument and authoritarian mentality - ask for permission to
    give your own thoughts, don\'t \"give advice\" as an equalizer
    between you and patient

-   Defuse resistance to change - emphasize patient autonomy and reflect
    resistance

    Evaluation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Continuing the conversation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   OARS\" interviewing skills: Open-ended questions, Affirm, Reflect,
    Summarize

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Open-ended questions encourage thoughtful responses and provide
    flexibility on how to answer

-   Affirmations acknowledge the good, accentuate the positive, and
    recognize the inherent worth of another human being

-   Reflections are a guess by the listener as to what the speaker means

-   Summaries are similar to reflections and pull together several ideas

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Simply reflecting what patient said in slightly different terms
    often leads to patient feeling heard and recognized

-   Most effective in conjunction with other treatments, when patients
    are willing, and when patients express ideas for change themselves

-   Least effective in group format and when patient feels change comes
    from authority

-   May be effective to have SMART goal setting if patient is in any
    stage except precontemplation: Specific, Measurable, Attainable,
    Realistic, Time-limited, but only once permission has been granted

Pulmonary

Editor: Bailey Decoursey, MD and Justin Smith, MD

Reviewed by Katie McPherson, MD

Basics of Blood Gases -- Lexi Haugh

Did you order an ABG or VBG?

-   Need to assess oxygenation 🡪 ABG

-   Need to assess hypoventilation 🡪May use VBG. ABG if shock, severe
    hypercapnia

-   pH -\> VBG usually correlates with an ABG (venous pH is \~0.04 lower
    than arterial pH)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Less accurate in shock or severe acid-base disturbance

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ABGs are obtained by respiratory both at VUMC and the VA

-   VBGs can be ordered like other labs on the floor. Ran as point of
    care test (iSTAT) in the ICU

Assessing Oxygenation:

-   A-a gradient = PAO2 (alveolar O2) -- PaO2 (arterial O2)

-   PAO2 = FiO2 (Pbarom - PH2O) - PaCO2/R

-   FiO2 = 0.21 on room air otherwise obtain from ventilator

-   Pbarom = 760, PH2O = 47

-   R (respiratory quotient) = 0.8

-   PaCO2 = arterial CO2 measured on ABG

-   Normal A-a gradient = (Age +10)/4

-   See hypoxia section for ddx of increased A-a gradient

Assessing Acid/Base Status: See Nephrology section for further
discussion on acid base

Hypoxia -- Emily Lovern

Background

-   A condition where the oxygen supply is inadequate either to the body
    as a whole (general hypoxia) or to a specific region (tissue
    hypoxia)

-   Two major ways to measure oxygenation, which are similar but
    distinct:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   SpO2 or \"pulse ox\" - most common, measures the O2 saturation of
    Hgb at capillary level

    -   \<95% is abnormal, but do not need supplemental O2 unless
        \<90-92% in most pts

-   PaO2 - the partial pressure of oxygenation measured on an ABG

    -   \<80 mmHg is abnormal

-   The relationship between SpO2 and PaO2 is the classic S-shaped
    curve.

    -   SpO2 of \<88% if PaO2 begins to fall off dangerously fast

Mechanisms of Hypoxia

+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| Mechanism          | Pathophysiology                                 |
+====================+=================================================+
| Decreased          | Normal A-a gradient                             |
| barometric         |                                                 |
| pressure           | Unlikely to be seen except at high altitudes    |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| Hypoventilation    | Normal A-a gradient                             |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | Hypoxia easily correctable with supplemental O2 |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| V/Q Mismatch       | Increased A-a gradient                          |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | Processes that lead to areas of lung where V/Q  |
|                    | \<1                                             |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | Common examples include PNA, ARDS, pulmonary    |
|                    | edema                                           |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| Right-to-left      | Increased A-a gradient                          |
| Shunt              |                                                 |
|                    | Can be anatomic (e.g. intracardiac, AVMs) or    |
|                    | physiologic (water/pus/blood filling alveoli)   |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | Classically does not easily correct with        |
|                    | supplemental O2                                 |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| Diffusion          | Increased A-a gradient                          |
| Limitation         |                                                 |
|                    | Often related to diseases affecting the         |
|                    | interstitium \-- e.g., ILD                      |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+

Differential diagnosis for hypoxia based on anatomical location

+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| Anatomical         | Differential Diagnosis                          |
| Location           |                                                 |
+====================+=================================================+
| Airways            | COPD most common, Asthma in very severe cases   |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | CF, bronchiectasis in pts with appropriate      |
|                    | history                                         |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| Alveoli            | Blood                                           |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | Pus: infection from bacterial, viral, fungal    |
|                    | agents                                          |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | Water: pulmonary edema                          |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | Protein/Cells/Other: ARDS, pneumonitis (e.g.    |
|                    | aspiration, drug-induced)                       |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| Inter              | Interstitial lung disease                       |
| stitium/Parenchyma |                                                 |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| Vascular           | Pulmonary Emboli                                |
|                    |                                                 |
|                    | Suspect in pts with significant hypoxia and a   |
|                    | clear CXR                                       |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+
| Pleural Space and  | Pleural effusions, PTX, neuromuscular weakness, |
|                    | tense ascites                                   |
| Chest Wall         |                                                 |
|                    | More likely to cause dyspnea, need to be severe |
|                    | to cause hypoxia                                |
+--------------------+-------------------------------------------------+

Evaluation

-   Confirm true hypoxia with good waveform

-   CXR

-   Labs: CBC, BMP, BNP, troponin, ABG/VBG, coags

-   EKG

-   TTE: obtain with bubble if shunt on ddx

-   Lung US: B lines, lung sliding, effusions, consolidations
    (hepatization), diaphragm paralysis

-   Chest CT without contrast for evaluation of lung parenchyma

-   CTA chest if suspicion for PE (see PE section)

-   Outpt PFTs if suspected obstructive or restrictive disease

Management

-   Should be directed at underlying cause

-   If acutely decompensating, Duonebs, IV lasix, antibiotics depending
    on clinical picture

-   Supplemental O2 for goal SpO2:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   90-96% for most pts

-   Between 88-92% for pts with chronic hypoxia from COPD (i.e., on home
    O2)

Pulmonary Function Tests (PFTs) -- Madelaine Behrens

Full PFTs include:

-   Spirometry: FVC, FEV1, with or without bronchodilator

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pts with new shortness of breath, chronic cough, or upper airway
    obstruction

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Plethysmography: TLC, RV

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Evaluation of restrictive diseases (ILD, neuromuscular) or
    hyperinflation (COPD, asthma)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diffusion (DLCO) can be added to plethysmography

-   "Full PFTs" = Spirometry + Plethysmography + DLCO

Tips for ordering

-   Initial diagnostic workup: Full PFTs with bronchodilator challenge

-   Chronic Lung disease: Spirometry to track FEV1/FVC over time ± DLCO
    to evaluate ILD

Interpretation

-   Distinguish between obstructive and restrictive disease

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   FEV1/FVC \< 0.7 (GOLD) or \< LLN (American Thoracic Society)
    indicates obstructive disease

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Normal to increased FVC & TLC is consistent with isolated
    obstructive disease

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TLC \< 80% or \< LLN (ATS) is diagnostic of restrictive disease

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Reduced FVC is suggestive, but not diagnostic of restrictive disease

-   FEV1 commonly too but FEV1/FVC ratio is normal in isolated
    restrictive disease

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Decreased FEV1/FVC and TLC suggests a mixed obstructive and
    restrictive picture

-   Decreased FVC in restriction or air trapping, RV and FRC  with
    restriction, RV and FRC with air trapping

-   ERV +/- FRC ¯ in obesity

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Assess DLCO \-- \<LLN (ATS) or \<80% (GOLD) is low

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Decreased DLCO can help differentiate between causes of obstructive
    or restrictive PFTs

-   DLCO \>120%: L🡪 R shunt, alveolar hemorrhage, polycythemia

-   Normal DLCO + obstruction: asthma, early COPD/CF

-   Normal DLCO + restriction: pleural disease, chest wall (obesity,
    scoliosis), neuromuscular disorders)

-   Low DLCO + obstruction 🡪 emphysema, CF, bronchiectasis

-   Low DLCO + restriction 🡪 parenchymal lung disease, lung resection

-   Low DLCO + normal spirometry: anemia, early ILD, pulmonary edema,
    mixed obstruction/restriction pattern (pseudonormalization of PFTs)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bronchodilator response:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Asthma: spirometry may be normal, +bronchodilator response (an
    increase in FEV1 by 12% and 200ml after bronchodilator),
    +methacholine challenge

-   Though we use FEV1/FVC to diagnose, we track disease severity using
    FEV1

Acute Asthma Exacerbation -- Rafael J. Fernandez III, Stacy McIntyre

Presentation

-   Sub-acute to acute progressive worsening of dyspnea, chest
    tightness, wheezing, and cough

-   Important historical cues: Prior hx of asthma, adherence to
    controller medications, triggers (exercise, allergens, cold)

-   Risk stratifying: Hx of intubations/ exacerbations, recent steroid
    course for exacerbation

-   Physical exam: wheezing, poor air movement, tachypnea, ↑ work of
    breathing, hypoxemia

-   Peak flows can help and are often cited in literature but do not
    change management acutely, can be useful as baseline for assessing
    response to therapy.

-   PEF \<200 L/min or PEF \<50% predicted indicates severe obstruction,
    PEF \<70% predicted indicates moderate exacerbation)

Evaluation

-   Generally aimed at ruling out causes for exacerbation and other
    diagnoses; these are not required but should be considered in pts
    being admitted for inpt management:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   EKG, trop, BNP, D-dimer to assess for cardiac cause (ACS, CHF, PE)

-   CXR to rule out underlying process (PNA, PTX, atelectasis)

-   ABG/VBG not routinely needed unless ill-appearing, tachypneic, or
    lethargic/altered

-   Dangerous signs and possible ICU if:

-   Tachypnea \>30 and/or significantly increased work-of-breathing

-   Hypercapnia or even normocapnia (these pts are usually
    hyperventilating; a normal CO2 in a severe asthma exacerbation could
    indicate impending respiratory failure)

-   Altered mental status

-   Requiring continuous nebulizers

Management

-   Good asthma care requires frequent re-evaluation. Generally,
    reassess q1h after treatment initiation. If deteriorating, step up
    the ladder of management

-   ABC: if not protecting airway, intubate and admit to ICU

-   Peak expiratory flow (Order in EPIC "Peak Flow Measurement"). If pt
    cannot do it, consider A/VBG if ill-appearing, tachypneic,
    lethargic/AMS, or thinking about engaging ICU

-   SpO2 goal 93-95%. Avoid hyperoxia

-   Further work-up: Not required, but aimed at ruling out causes of
    exacerbation and other dx

-   CBC w/ diff (looking at eosinophils)

-   CXR to rule out underlying process (PNA, PTX, atelectasis)

+-----+-------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
|     | **Mild/Moderate** | **Severe**        | **ICU**               |
+=====+===================+===================+=======================+
| >   | *Physical Exam*   | *Physical Exam*   | *Physical Exam*       |
|  ** |                   |                   |                       |
| Ass | Wheezing          | Wheezing          | Drowsy, AMS. silent   |
| ess |                   |                   | chest                 |
| men | Phrase Dyspnea    | Single Word       |                       |
| t** |                   | Dyspnea           | Increased work of     |
|     | ∅ Accessory       |                   | breathing             |
|     | Muscle Use        | \+ Accessory      |                       |
|     |                   | Muscle Use        | *Objective Data*      |
|     | Tachypnea         |                   |                       |
|     |                   | Tripoding         | CO2 on Blood Gas      |
|     | Tachycardia       |                   |                       |
|     | 100-120           | Tachypnea \>30    | Low at first          |
|     |                   |                   | (Hyperventilation)    |
|     | *Objective Data*  | Tachycardia \>120 |                       |
|     |                   |                   | Normal or High →      |
|     | O2 Saturation     | *Objective Data*  | Impending Respiratory |
|     | 90-95% on RA      |                   | Failure               |
|     |                   | O2 Saturation     |                       |
|     | PEF \> 50%        | \<90% on RA       | Requiring Continuous  |
|     | Predicted         |                   | Nebulizers to         |
|     |                   | PEF \< 50%        | maintain O2           |
|     |                   | Predicted         | saturations           |
+-----+-------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+
| >   | SABA Nebulizer ±  | SABA/Ipratropium  | Continuous DuoNebs    |
|  ** | Ipratropium       | Nebulizer         |                       |
| Man |                   |                   | IV Methylprednisolone |
| age | Supplemental O2   | Supplemental O2   | 125 q6hr (as likely   |
| men | to 93-95%         | to 93-95%         | can't protect airway) |
| t** |                   |                   |                       |
|     | Begin Oral        | Begin Oral        | IV Magnesium 4g 20    |
|     | Prednisone 60mg   | Prednisone 60mg   | minutes               |
|     |                   |                   |                       |
|     |                   | Consider          | Consider High Dose    |
|     |                   |                   | Inhaled               |
|     |                   | IV Magnesium 4g   | Corticosteroid        |
|     |                   | 20 minutes        |                       |
|     |                   |                   | NPO                   |
|     |                   | Consider High     |                       |
|     |                   | Dose ICS          | IV Fluids to make up  |
|     |                   |                   | insensible losses     |
|     |                   |                   | (consider             |
|     |                   |                   | comorbidities though) |
+-----+-------------------+-------------------+-----------------------+

Adapted from GINA 2022 Guidelines, Box 4-4 (https://www.ginasthma.org)

Further Management

-   Corticosteroids: dosing based on severity of illness

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Oral equivalent to IV (Lancet 1986;1:181-184)

-   Transition to PO and lower dose after improving air movement, work
    of breathing and gas exchange

-   Will need minimum of 5-7 days of oral corticosteroids.

-   Good data for no need to taper in general population, sometimes
    considered in someone with multiple severe exacerbations.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Step down SABA-Nebulizer treatments based on wheezing

-   Inspiratory/Expiratory wheezing q2 -\> q3; Mostly Expiratory
    wheezing q3 -\> q4; Minimal Wheezing q4 -\> q6 or PRN. (Pediatrics
    2000; 106 (5): 1006--12)

-   No need for empiric antibiotics unless there is concern for
    bacterial infection, then treat as Pneumonia (see Pneumonia
    chapters)

Prior to discharge:

-   Ensure that pt is on appropriate controller medications.

-   See outpt management section but consider starting an ICS/LABA as
    part of SMART (JAMA 2018; 319(14):1485--1496)

-   Evaluate for causes of acute exacerbation to prevent future events
    (noncompliance, resp viruses, allergies, exposures, etc.). Evaluate
    for asthma inflammatory phenotype after recovery (IgE, peripheral
    eos, ABPA)

-   Can consider writing a simple asthma action plan
    ([https://ginasthma.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/GINA-Pt-Guide-2021-copy.pdf](https://ginasthma.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/GINA-Patient-Guide-2021-copy.pdf))

-   Consider follow up with PCP vs. pulmonologist for evaluation of
    outpt regimen

COPD Exacerbation -- Taylor Coston

Background

-   Presentation: increased dyspnea, cough, and sputum production or
    purulence, diffuse wheezing, distant breath sounds, tachypnea,
    tachycardia

-   Severe respiratory insufficiency: accessory muscle use, fragmented
    speech, inability to lie supine, profound diaphoresis, agitation,
    asynchrony between chest and abdominal wall with respiration,
    failure to improve with initial emergency treatment

-   Impending respiratory arrest: Inability to maintain respiratory
    effort, cyanosis, hemodynamic instability, and depressed mental
    status

-   Remember that pts with COPD can have other causes of respiratory
    distress including acute coronary syndrome, decompensated heart
    failure, PE, PNA, PTX, sepsis, acidosis

Evaluation

-   Initial Assessment: ABCs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Airway/Breathing: Ensure pt is protecting airway

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If obtunded or in severe respiratory distress 🡪 intubation

-   BiPAP typically appropriate for severe COPD exacerbation unless
    contraindication (vomiting, obtundation, facial trauma)

-   BiPAP is ordered as IPAP and EPAP, 12/5 is often a good start

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Circulation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For hemodynamic instability 🡪 immediate rapid sequence intubation.
    Pt's can be hypotensive for a host of reasons (pneumothorax, sepsis,
    circulatory collapse from hypoxia and bradycardia, etc)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Subsequent Workup:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Continuous pulse oximetry, ABG/VBG, EKG, CXR, CBC, BMP, troponin,
    BNP, sputum cx, RPP, blood cultures if hemodynamically unstable

-   Lung ultrasound to differentiate COPD from pulmonary edema when a pt
    presents with wheezing and respiratory failure (pulmonary edema will
    have B lines)

-   Consider trigger: viral infection (70%), PNA, PE (have a high index
    of suspicion for PE)

Management

-   Bronchodilators

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Order "Respiratory Care Therapy Management Protocol" at VUMC

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   RT evaluates the pt and based on physical exam will give a duoneb.
    Continues to assess the pt and treats based on severity of the
    exacerbation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If ordering bronchodilators individually:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Albuterol 2.5 mg diluted to 3 mL via nebulizer or 4 to 8 inhalations
    from MDI every 4 hours while awake (RT) or more frequently if needed

-   Ipratropium 500 mcg via nebulizer, or 4-8 inhalations from MDI q4
    hrs while awake

-   Can additionally order Duoneb (albuterol and ipratropium) q4-6 hours
    at VUMC

-   There is no respiratory order protocol at the VA, order individually
    as above

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Steroids

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For severe exacerbation give methylprednisolone 125 mg IV BID (or
    60mg IV q6h)

-   For moderate to mild COPD exacerbations give prednisone 40mg PO
    daily for 5 days (including the initial IV dose if pt received one
    in the ER)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Antibiotics

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For moderate to severe exacerbations

-   Azithromycin (500mg x 1 then 250mg daily x 4 or 500mg daily x 3) or
    doxycycline 200 mg BID if concern for QT prolongation. Can consider
    respiratory fluroquinolone in certain high-risk pts but typically
    too broad

-   Refer to Pneumonia in Infection Disease chapter if treating
    concomitant pneumonia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Discharge Planning:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Controller medications/inhalers (see COPD in Outpt chapter)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Make sure any new inhalers are covered by insurance prior to
    discharge

-   Provide inhaler education and consider use of a spacer

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Vaccinations (influenza, COVID, pneumococcal)

Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Exacerbation -- Daniel Motta-Calderon

Background

-   Presentation: Acute worsening of pulmonary symptoms such as
    new/increased cough, sputum production (or change in sputum
    quality), dyspnea. May have constitutional symptoms including
    fatigue, poor appetite

-   Pathogenesis: viral infections, bacterial overgrowth (most common
    include Pseudomonas, S. aureus, Burkholderia), NTM, treatment
    non-adherence

Evaluation

-   "Cystic Fibrosis" Admission order set in Epic contains most of the
    work-up and management

-   Labs: Sputum culture (specify CF culture), RPP

-   CXR PA and lateral

-   Always ask about coughing up blood and amount \-- see "Hemoptysis"
    section if present

Management

-   All pts need a cystic fibrosis Pulmonary consult (unless on Rogers
    Pulmonary if attending specializes in CF). FYI there is no fellow so
    don't worry when you have to page an attending

-   All CF pts are placed on contact precautions no matter the
    indication for their hospitalization

-   Antibiotic selection

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Check CF notes, recent hospitalizations, culture data (e.g. MRSA,
    MSSA, Pseudomonas)

-   If they were recently admitted and improved on that antibiotic
    regimen, it is usually a good empiric choice. CF team will
    ultimately guide regimen

-   General coverage for MRSA: vancomycin (Bactrim or linezolid for
    allergies)

-   General coverage for Pseudomonas: penicillin class (cephalosporin,
    carbapenem, extended penicillin) AND aminoglycoside or
    ciprofloxacin. Second line Colistin.

-   Be aware that the antibiotic doses are NOT the typical doses used
    for other indications. Use Epic Order Adult Cystic Fibrosis order
    set (or per CF team, pharmacy)

-   Continue tobramycin nebs (if on that month) and MWF azithromycin
    unless otherwise contraindicated if they are on these therapies at
    home

-   Treatment duration is based on improvement in symptoms and FEV1
    recovery, usually 14-21 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Airway/sputum clearance

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Albuterol nebs, pulmozyme (if on at home), hypertonic saline (if on
    at home), Vest, positive end expiratory pressure valve (PEP, e.g.
    Flutter, Acapella), chest percussive devices (the wand) as last
    choice (not as effective)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CF modulators (e.g. Trikafta -ivacaftor/tezacaftor/elaxacaftor):
    continue if on at home; needs a non-formulary order to use own
    supply; time with fat rich meal for absorption

-   Nutrition/GI

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pancreatic enzymes (most are on them), order at bedside for pt
    administration

-   Always continue ADEK vitamins

-   Daily to 3 times a week weight checks

-   Nutrition consult

DIOS - Distal Intestinal Obstruction Syndrome

-    Acute obstruction (complete or incomplete) in ileocecum by
    inspissated intestinal contents. Presents with abdominal
    pain/distension, constipation, poor appetite, and possibly vomiting
    that often looks like mechanical obstruction

-   Pathogenesis: multifactorial including insufficient pancreatic
    enzyme activity, dehydration, and intestinal dysmotility

-   CT can help rule out acute intraabdominal pathology
    (intussusception, SBO, appendicitis, volvulus) and typically shows
    proximal small bowel dilation and stool burden in distal ileum

-   Treat with Miralax and/or Golytely if tolerating PO. If not
    tolerating PO or with bilious vomiting, might need hyperosmolar
    contrast enema (gastrografin)

-   RARELY surgery, try medical management first

-   Prevention is key! Pts with CF should be on a bowel regimen in the
    outpt setting.

Hemoptysis -- Angela Liu, Henry Brems

Background

-   Distinguish between massive (\>600cc/24hr or \>100cc/hr) and
    non-massive hemoptysis. Can be difficult to quantify expectorated
    blood volume and volume that is retained in lungs

-   Massive is potentially life-threatening due to impaired ventilation

-   UGIB (hematemesis) and nasopharyngeal bleeds can easily mimic
    hemoptysis

-   Presentation based on source of bleed:

+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Structure    | Etiologies                                            |
+==============+=======================================================+
| Airways      | Bronchitis (common cause of non-massive),             |
|              | bronchiectasis (especially in CF pts), neoplasm       |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Alveolar/    | Infectious (bacterial PNA, abscess, TB, fungal,       |
|              | aspergilloma), rheumatologic (Goodpasture's, GPA,     |
| Parenchymal  | Behcet's)                                             |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Vascular     | PE, AVM, CHF, mitral stenosis, bronchovascular        |
|              | fistula                                               |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+
| Other        | Coagulopathy, traumatic, foreign-body, iatrogenic,    |
|              | cocaine-induced                                       |
+--------------+-------------------------------------------------------+

Evaluation

-   Determine coagulation status: medications, PT/PTT, platelets

-   Labs: CBC, BMP, coags, UA (for hematuria), ABG (evaluate
    oxygenation), type and screen

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider ANA, ANCA, anti-GBM, anti-cardiopipin, IFNG release assay,
    sputum culture (bacteria, fungal, AFB), sputum cytology (if not
    undergoing bronchoscopy), and RPP depending on clinical context

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Imaging: CXR first (to evaluate etiology and to localize the source
    to a side). Chest CT depending on prior workup, severity of bleed,
    and stability of pt

-   Bronchoscopy is sometimes indicated to localize bleeding source.

Management

-   Urgent evaluation if any hemodynamic compromise, hypoxia,
    hypercarbia, or respiratory distress

-   Ensure a secure airway: massive hemoptysis may require intubation
    and MICU transfer

-   Reverse underlying coagulopathy if present. Consider trending HCT

-   If unilateral bleed, place bleeding lung down. Ex: if the source is
    left lung, place pt on left side to prevent filling \'good\' lung
    with blood (include this info in sign-out if known)

-   Urgent Pulmonary consult if clinical instability: Bronchoscopy is
    diagnostic and therapeutic.

-   Obtain CT Bronchial Artery Protocol if concern for bronchial artery
    source (especially in CF pts) so embolization can be planned

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Order this at VUMC with a CTA Chest (NOT a CTA PE as that will be
    timed incorrectly) and include \"bronchial artery protocol\" in
    comments for the study

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider IR consult for angiography as diagnostic and therapeutic
    option

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consult early if there is massive hemoptysis. If bronchoscopy is
    attempted but fails to stop the bleed, they can get to angiography
    fastest if IR has already been made aware

-   Recurrent hemoptysis is still typically controlled with repeat
    embolization.

Interstitial Lung Disease (ILD) -- Madelaine Behrens

Background

-   Heterogenous group of parenchymal lung diseases that involve
    scarring or fibrosis, affecting the lung interstitium, alveoli, and
    pulmonary capillaries

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Leads to loss of lung volume and compliance and impaired gas
    exchange

-   Radiologic appearance not specific for underlying cause. No cause
    -\> IIP

Etiologies

+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+
| Idiopathic Interstitial         | Secondary Causes                   |
| Pneumonias (IIPs)               |                                    |
+=================================+====================================+
| Acute fibrinous and organizing  | **Connective tissue disease**:     |
| pneumonia (AFOP)                | scleroderma (most common cause of  |
|                                 | ILD), Sjogren's, RA (ILD is the    |
| Acute interstitial pneumonia    | most common pulmonary              |
| (AIP)                           | manifestation), dermatomyositis,   |
|                                 | polymyositis, SLE (least common to |
| Cryptogenic organizing          | cause ILD), MCTD                   |
| pneumonia (COP, formerly BOOP)  |                                    |
|                                 | **Hypersensitivity pneumonitis**   |
| Eosinophilic pneumonia          | (organic): farm exposures, chicken |
|                                 | coops, pesticide, stored grains,   |
| Idiopathic desquamative         | mold (e.g. water damage in home,   |
| interstitial pneumonia (iDIP)   | hot tub)                           |
|                                 |                                    |
| Idiopathic pleuroparenchymal    | **Iatrogenic**\*: amiodarone,      |
| fibroelastosis (PPFE)           | bleomycin, MTX, busulfan,          |
|                                 | immunotherapies, TKI, TNF-a        |
| Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis   | inhibitors, nitrofurantoin,        |
|                                 | hydralazine, radiation             |
| Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia |                                    |
| (LIP)                           | **Pneumoconioses** (inorganic):    |
|                                 | coal mines, silica, asbestos,      |
| Pulmonary Langerhans cell       | beryllium, organic solvents, heavy |
| histiocytosis (PLCH)            | metals, solder, hair dressing      |
|                                 | chemicals                          |
| Unclassifiable ILD              |                                    |
|                                 | **Sarcoidosis**                    |
|                                 |                                    |
|                                 | **Vasculitis**: granulomatis with  |
|                                 | polyangiitis, eosinophilic         |
|                                 | granulomatosis with polyangiitis   |
|                                 |                                    |
|                                 | **Other**: pulmonary alveolar      |
|                                 | proteinosis,                       |
|                                 | lymphangioleiomyomatosis,          |
|                                 | amyloidosis                        |
+---------------------------------+------------------------------------+

\*Over 150 medications are linked to ILD
([www.pneumotox.com](http://www.pneumotox.com) is the best reference for
drugs associated with specific ILD patterns

Evaluation

-   Dry cough is the most common symptom of ILD. Productive coughs are
    uncharacteristic

-   Dyspnea (especially on exertion) is also typical of many progressive
    ILDs.

-   Occupational and environmental exposures: pets, dust, hay, grass,
    molds, organic/inorganic compounds

-   Medications, smoking history, radiation history, family history lung
    disease

-   Autoimmunity and vasculitis symptoms: dysphagia, arthritis, myalgia,
    rash, Raynaud's phenomenon, hematuria, hemoptysis, mononeuritis
    multiplex

    High resolution CT (image of choice): evaluates the lung parenchyma
    while pt is supine and prone (to rule out atelectasis), and with
    inspiratory and expiratory cuts (to identify air trapping -
    mosaicism worse with expiration)

+------------+-------------------------+-------------------------------+
| IIPs       | Radiographic features   | Clinical features             |
| Pattern    |                         |                               |
+============+=========================+===============================+
| Usual      | Basilar and subpleural  | \- Predominantly seen in IPF, |
| in         | predominant fibrosis/   | but is also seen in many      |
| terstitial | reticulation,           | progressive fibrosing         |
| pneumonia  | honeycombing, and       | diseases, as well as          |
| (UIP)      | tractionbronchiectasis/ | radiation and                 |
|            |                         | chemo/immunotherapy induced   |
|            | bronchiolectasis with   | ILDs.                         |
|            | minimal GGOs.           |                               |
|            |                         | \- Generally this             |
|            |                         | radiographic pattern          |
|            |                         | progresses more quickly       |
|            |                         | irrespective of the           |
|            |                         | underlying cause.             |
+------------+-------------------------+-------------------------------+
| No         | Peribronchovascular     | \- May be idiopathic, or      |
| n-Specific | predominant GGOs with   | secondary to medications or   |
| In         | subpleural sparing,     | connective tissue diseases    |
| terstitial | increased reticular     |                               |
| Pneumonia  | patterns, and mosaic    | Steroid responsive            |
| (NSIP)     | attenuation due to air  |                               |
|            | trapping. Minimal or    | \- Can coexist with UIP       |
|            | absent honeycombing     |                               |
+------------+-------------------------+-------------------------------+
| Acute      | Similar to ARDS --      | Rapid onset (7-10 days)       |
| in         | bilateral               | fever, cough, SOB. High       |
| terstitial | consolidations with     | morbimortality, usually       |
| pneumonia  | lobular sparring,       | presenting as ARDS.           |
| (AIP)      | traction                |                               |
|            | bronchiectasis,         |                               |
|            | architecture            |                               |
|            | distortion.             |                               |
+------------+-------------------------+-------------------------------+
| C          | Subpleural and          | \- Can present clinically     |
| ryptogenic | peribronchial           | with cough, DOE, malaise,     |
| organizing | multifocal migratory    | fevers                        |
| pneumonia  | consolidations.         |                               |
| (COP)      |                         | \- Steroid-responsive (must   |
|            |                         | rule out inciting process     |
|            |                         | first by obtaining GMS        |
|            |                         | staining, AFB, and            |
|            |                         | histo/blasto, reviewing meds, |
|            |                         | radiation history, etc.)      |
+------------+-------------------------+-------------------------------+
| Smoki      |                         |                               |
| ng-related |                         |                               |
| IIPs       |                         |                               |
+------------+-------------------------+-------------------------------+
| De         | Many have normal CXRs.  | Young current or former       |
| squamative | Ground glass opacities  | smokers with subacute         |
| in         | without the peripheral  | dyspnea, wheezing and cough.  |
| terstitial | reticular opacities     |                               |
| pneumonia  | characteristic of UIP   | In biopsy, intraluminal       |
| (DIP)      |                         | macrophages containing dusty  |
|            |                         | light brown pigment.          |
|            |                         |                               |
|            |                         | Good prognosis - reversible   |
|            |                         | with smoking cessation.       |
+------------+-------------------------+-------------------------------+
| Rtory      | Bronchial thickening,   |                               |
| bron       | centrilobular nodules,  |                               |
| chiolitis- | patchy GGOs.            |                               |
| associated |                         |                               |
| ILD        |                         |                               |
| (RB-ILD)   |                         |                               |
+------------+-------------------------+-------------------------------+

Evaluation

-   Labs without Pulmonology consult

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ESR, CRP, ANA w/ reflex ENA, RF, CCP

-   CBC with diff: evaluate eosinophilia or cytopenias concerning for
    autoimmune disease

-   CMP, CK, aldolase: may fine renal \*vasculitis and liver/muscle
    enzyme abnormalities (CT-ILD), hypercalcemia (rarely in sarcoid or
    other granulomatous disease)

-   RPP, sputum culture

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Labs in conjunction with Pulmonology

-   Myositis panel: 70% of those with anti-synthetase syndrome will have
    primary lung pathology without myositis findings, anti-Scl-70 and
    anti-RNP most commonly

-   Hypersensitivity pneumonitis panel: should be sent to a highly
    specialized lab since not all labs use an immunoprecipitation
    technique (crucial)

-   Histo antigen, blasto antigen, aspergillus galactomannan,
    1-3-β-D-glucan, sputum GMS; consider NTM and HIV

-   PFTs: usually restrictive lung disease

-   Spirometry: expect to see ↓ FEV1 and FVC with FEV1/FVX \>0.7

-   Lung volumes: ↓ TLC, RV, and/or FRC

-   DLCO: Gas exchange is generally impaired and worsens with disease
    progression

-   Bronchoscopy and biopsy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   BAL is not diagnostic ILD: may help understand the underlying
    inflammatory response (eosinophilic PNA, lymphocytosis of \>40% in
    hypersensitivity pneumonitis) and rule out infection (particularly
    in organizing PNA)

-   Consider when there is diagnostic uncertainty: indeterminate or
    non-UIP patterns, more GGOs than anticipated, air trapping indicated
    HP, or concern for superimposed infection

-   Transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) is usually nondiagnostic in ILD
    outside of sarcoidosis or HP. Cryobiopsy can be considered an
    alternative to surgical lung biopsy for histopathology.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other tests to consider

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   6-minute walk test: prognostic value

-   TTE to evaluate for pHTN

-   SLP evaluation for indolent aspiration

Management

-   Acute exacerbation (AE-ILD)

-   Definition: acute lung injury (new onset bilateral pulmonary
    infiltrates, PaO2 /FiO2 ≤ 300, and PAWP ≤ 18) in the absence
    of heart failure, pulmonary infection, pulmonary embolism (PE),
    aspiration, or drug reaction

-   Chest CT is imaging standard, both to diagnose and also rule out
    other etiologies of AHRF

-   Treat any underlying trigger, support with supplemental oxygen and
    respiratory therapy

-   Generally, UIP pattern (i.e. end-stage fibrosis) is NOT steroid
    responsive acutely or chronically.

-   Consult pulmonology and rheumatology if CTD-ILD to guide
    immunosuppression.

-   Chronic therapy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Antifibrotics

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Main utility is in pts with IPF

-   Tyrosine kinase inhibition: nintedanib (INBUILD & INPULSIS trials):
    decreases rate of decline in FVC, no reduction on mortality

    -   Adverse effects: abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
        anorexia, weight loss, elevated AST and ALT

-   TGF-beta inhibition: pirfenidone (RELIEF & ASCEND trials): May slow
    rate of decline of DLCO and 6MWT distance, no mortality reduction

    -   Adverse effects: GI discomfort and photosensitivity

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Immunosuppression

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   MUST rule out infection prior to use

-   Steroid/immunosuppression responsive (generally): COP, NSIP
    (cellular subtype), CT-ILD, inflammatory HP, granulomatous
    inflammation (sarcoidosis, silicosis, berylliosis, etc.),
    eosinophilic pneumonia, vasculitis-associated ILDs

-   Not steroid responsive: IPF, fibrotic HP

-   There is increased mortality in IPF with azathioprine/prednisone.
    NAC (PANTHER-IPF trial)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other considerations

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Smoking cessation

-   Drug removal: consider discontinuing amiodarone, checkpoint
    inhibitor, etc

-   Hypersensitivity pneumonitis: antigen exposure elimination

-   Eosinophilic pneumonia: steroids; biologics can be used (send to
    Allergy clinic)

-   Consider lung transplant eval for progressive or rapidly
    decompensating fibrotic lung disease

-   Pulmonary rehabilitation is crucial (trend towards mortality
    benefit)

Lung Masses -- Sybil Watkins, Chandler Montgomery

Background

-   Definitions: lesion \< 3 cm = pulmonary nodule. Lesion \> 3 cm =
    lung mass

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pulmonary nodules are common and often benign, but presence of lung
    mass (\>3cm) should prompt workup as chance of malignancy is high
    (\>50%)

-   Refer to "Pulmonary Nodule" chapter

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Differential diagnosis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Malignant

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Primary non-small cell lung cancer (NCSLC): adenocarcinoma (\~40%),
    squamous cell (SCC, \~20%), large cell carcinoma (\~5%)

-   Metastatic: commonly melanoma, sarcoma, colon, breast, renal,
    testicular

-   Often multiple nodules/masses (e.g. cannonball) 

-   Neuroendocrine: small cell lung cancer (SCLC, \~15%), carcinoid,
    large cell neuroendocrine

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Infectious

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Granulomatous: TB, non-TB mycobacterium, endemic fungal (histo,
    blasto, coccidio)

-   May have component of calcification

-   Abscess: Staph aureus, Klebsiella, anaerobes, polymicrobial
    (aspiration)

-   Septic emboli, hydatid cyst, aspergilloma

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other: hamartoma, AVM, pulmonary infarct, inflammatory nodule (GPA,
    RA), sarcoidosis

Evaluation

-   History: smoking, cough, hemoptysis, dyspnea, chest pain, weight
    loss, fevers, night sweats, hoarseness (recurrent laryngeal nerve
    involvement), bone pain, FND, Horner's syndrome

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lung cancer should always be considered in a pt with recurrent
    pneumonia (post-obstructive) or smoking history with new cough or
    hemoptysis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Exam: cachexia, LAD, bone pain, hepatomegaly, FND, SVC syndrome,
    digital clubbing

-   Imaging

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CXR has poor sensitivity for lung nodules, may show large mass or
    malignant effusion

-   CT chest (with contrast if possible---better evaluation of
    mediastinum/LNs)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Review prior chest imaging to assess age and growth pattern of
    lesion(s)

-   Benign features: small (sub-centimeter), calcified, fat attenuation,
    stable over 2 years, multiple nodules

-   Concerning features: large, growth, spiculation, upper lobe
    location, thick-walled cavitation, mediastinal invasion

-   Location: adenocarcinoma often more peripheral, SCC often more
    central, SCLC associated with massive LAD, mediastinal invasion, and
    large hilar masses

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Look for paraneoplastic syndromes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   SCLC: SIADH, Lambert-Eaton, Cushing's syndrome

-   SCC: hypercalcemia (PTHrP)

-   Dermatomyositis, polymyositis, hypertrophic pulmonary
    osteoarthropathy (periostitis of long bones)

-   Marantic endocarditis

-   Hypercoagulability leading to venous thromboembolism

Staging/Diagnosis

-   Imaging: CT chest (with contrast if possible) and CTAP w/contrast
    vs. PET/CT to assess for metastasis. Consider MRI brain if clinical
    stage III or IV disease

-   Biopsy: careful planning is key

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For metastatic disease, obtain tissue from least invasive site

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   FNA or excision of palpable lymph node (cytology dept, US-guided
    procedure, EGS)

-   Pleural effusion: thoracentesis w/ cytology might provide initial
    info (sensitivity \~60%)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If uncertain how to best obtain tissue, consult IR, interventional
    pulm, and/or oncology to discuss approach

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Surgical Bx: Wedge resection/lobectomy often preferred if solitary
    nodule amenable to both diagnostic and therapeutic resection in good
    surgical candidate

-   Bronchoscopy with EBUS (endobronchial US) often used to obtain
    biopsy of mediastinal tissue or central/peri-bronchial lesion

-   Navigational bronchoscopy: allows for more precise maneuvering of
    scope/instrument into the periphery of the lungs under direct
    visualization while ensuring stability during sampling of target
    lesions; increased diagnostic yield

-   Trans-thoracic needle aspiration (TTNA): peripheral lesions not
    amenable to bronchoscopy

Management

-   NSCLC: Planning is complex, usually discussed at multidisciplinary
    tumor board

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stage I/II: surgical resection ± adjuvant chemotherapy

-   Stage III: more complex requiring multidisciplinary approach,
    typically combined chemoradiotherapy specifically with immunotherapy
    agents

-   Stage IV: chemo ± targeted therapy depending on PD-L1 expression,
    presence of driver mutations for EGFR, ALK, ROS-1, BRAF, MET, RET,
    others

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   SCLC: usually widely metastatic at time of diagnosis (\~70%),
    treated with systemic chemo/radiation specifically with
    immunotherapy agents

Lung Nodule -- David Krasinski

Background

-   Definition: focal, distinct radiographic density completely
    surrounded by lung tissue \<3cm (mass \>3cm -- see "Lung Mass"
    chapter)

-   Prevalence: 30% of all chest CTs. Most commonly are incidentalomas.
    \>95% are benign. Larger and irregularly shaped nodules are more
    likely to be malignant.

    Etiologies

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  **CT Pattern**                                                              **Pathology**   **Etiologies**
  ------------------------------------------------------ -------------------- --------------- ----------------------
  ![Hrct chest technique and                             **Random**:          Infections      Miliary TB, septic
  interpretation](media/image38.jpeg){width="0.9625in"   hematogenous spread.                 emboli
  height="1.7243055555555555in"}                                                              

                                                                              Malignancy      Sarcomas, carcinomas

                                                                              Other           Langerhans cell
                                                                                              histiocytosis

                                                         **Centrilobular**:   Infectious      Granulomas from fungi,
                                                         most diseases that                   mycobacteria, prior
                                                         track airways                        bacterial infx
                                                                                              (nocardia/S. aureus).

                                                                              Inflammatory    Aspiration,
                                                                                              hypersensitivity
                                                                                              pneumonitis,
                                                                                              bronchogenic cyst.

                                                                              Malignancy      Bronchogenic
                                                                                              carcinomas (central:
                                                                                              SCC, small-cell),
                                                                                              peripheral (adenoCa,
                                                                                              large cell)

                                                         **Peri lymphatic**:  Inflammatory    Sarcoidosis,
                                                         lymph system                         pneumoconiosis
                                                         spreadgret                           

                                                                              Malignant       Lymphangitic
                                                                                              carcinomatosis,
                                                                                              lymphoma, metastatic
                                                                                              sarcomas/carcinomas

                                                                              Benign          Hamartomas, fibromas,
                                                                                              hemangiomas,
                                                                                              leiomyomas,
                                                                                              amyloidoma.
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Management of solitary lung nodule

-   History: hx of exposures (tobacco, asbestos, mining, biomass fuel),
    geographical epidemiology (histo/coccidio/TB), B-symptoms, personal
    and FxHx of malignancy

-   Assess pt risk for malignancy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High risk: \>60yo, current smoker or heavy smoking history, history
    of cancer, FxHx lung cancer, irregular or spiculated, upper lobe,
    ≥2.3cm, double diameter or volume in past year

-   There are online risk calculators (Brock, Mayo, Herder) helpful for
    providers who are not experts in lung nodule risk stratification

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Benign imaging features: central calcification, popcorn-like
    (hamartomas), laminated, stippled

-   Consider Pulmonary referral if high risk features, known malignancy
    or recent history of malignancy, organ transplant or other
    immunocompromising condition, age \<35yo

Fleischner guidelines for nodules \<8mm

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Risk for        Solid \<6mm  Solid 6-8mm   Solid ≥8mm    Subsolid (GGO
  Malignancy                                               [±]{.mark} solid
                                                           component)
  --------------- ------------ ------------- ------------- ----------------
  Low             No follow-up CT at 6-12mo  Refer to      If \>6mm, refer
                               and consider  Pulm. CT in   to Pulm. If
                               at 18-24mo    3mo. Consider malignant, may
                                             PET + tissue  be slow growing.
                                             sampling\*    Requires follow
                                                           up to 5 years.
                                                           Initially every
                                                           6mo

  High            Optional CT  CT at 6-12mo                
                  in 12mo      and at                      
                               18-24mo                     
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

\*Tissue sampling usually occurs via transthoracic needle biopsy (via
IR), VATS (via thoracic surgery), or transbronchial biopsy (via
interventional pulm).

**ACCP 2013 Chest Guidelines for workup of nodules 8-30mm**

+---------+----------+---------+---+----+---------+--------+---------+
| Low to  |          |         |   | Hi |         |        |         |
| M       |          |         |   | gh |         |        |         |
| oderate |          |         |   | Su |         |        |         |
| Risk    |          |         |   | rg |         |        |         |
| Surical |          |         |   | ic |         |        |         |
| Risk    |          |         |   | al |         |        |         |
|         |          |         |   | Ri |         |        |         |
|         |          |         |   | sk |         |        |         |
+=========+==========+=========+===+====+=========+========+=========+
| Assess  |          |         | N |    |         |        | CT      |
| c       |          |         | o |    |         |        | surve   |
| linical |          |         | n |    |         |        | illance |
| proba   |          |         | s |    |         |        |         |
| blility |          |         | u |    |         |        |         |
| of      |          |         | r |    |         |        |         |
| cancer  |          |         | g |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | i |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | a |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | l |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | b |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | i |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | o |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | p |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | s |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | y |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | O |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | R |    |         |        |         |
+---------+----------+---------+---+----+---------+--------+---------+
| Very    | Low/mod  | High    | M |    | Non-dia | Sp     |         |
| low     |          |         | a |    | gnostic | ecific |         |
|         | (5-65%)  | (\>     | l |    |         | Benign |         |
| (\< 5%) |          | 65%)    | i |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | g |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | n |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | a |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | n |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | t |    |         |        |         |
+---------+----------+---------+---+----+---------+--------+---------+
| CT      | PET to   | S       | S |    | CT      | Sp     |         |
| surve   | assess   | tandard | t |    | surve   | ecific |         |
| illance | nodule   | stage   | a |    | illance | tre    |         |
|         |          | eval    | n |    |         | atment |         |
|         | à        | (       | d |    |         |        |         |
|         | Negative | [±]{.ma | a |    |         |        |         |
|         | or mild  | rk}PET) | r |    |         |        |         |
|         | uptate:  |         | d |    |         |        |         |
|         | CT       | à No    | s |    |         |        |         |
|         | surv     | met:    | t |    |         |        |         |
|         | eillance | S       | a |    |         |        |         |
|         | OR       | urgical | g |    |         |        |         |
|         | non      | re      | e |    |         |        |         |
|         | surgical | section | e |    |         |        |         |
|         | biopsy   | or SBRT | v |    |         |        |         |
|         |          | or RFA  | a |    |         |        |         |
|         | àMod or  |         | l |    |         |        |         |
|         | intense  | à + Met | ( |    |         |        |         |
|         | uptake:  | (N2,    | [ |    |         |        |         |
|         | non      | 3):     | ± |    |         |        |         |
|         | surgical | chemo   | ] |    |         |        |         |
|         | biopsy   | therapy | { |    |         |        |         |
|         | or       | or      | . |    |         |        |         |
|         | surgical | chemora | m |    |         |        |         |
|         | r        | diation | a |    |         |        |         |
|         | esection | (after  | r |    |         |        |         |
|         |          | biopsy) | k |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | } |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | P |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | E |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | T |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | ) |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         |   |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | à |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | N |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | o |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | m |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | e |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | t |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | : |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | S |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | u |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | r |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | g |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | i |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | c |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | a |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | l |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | r |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | e |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | s |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | e |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | c |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | t |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | i |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | o |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | n |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | o |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | r |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | S |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | B |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | R |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | T |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | o |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | r |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | R |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | F |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | A |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         |   |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | à |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         |   |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | + |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | M |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | e |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | t |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | ( |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | N |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | 2 |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | , |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | 3 |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | ) |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | : |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | c |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | h |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | e |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | m |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | o |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | t |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | h |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | e |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | r |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | a |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | p |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | y |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | o |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | r |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | c |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | h |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | e |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | m |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | o |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | r |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | a |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | d |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | i |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | a |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | t |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | i |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | o |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | n |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | ( |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | a |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | f |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | t |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | e |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | r |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | b |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | i |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | o |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | p |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | s |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | y |    |         |        |         |
|         |          |         | ) |    |         |        |         |
+---------+----------+---------+---+----+---------+--------+---------+

Pleural Effusions -- David Krasinski, Eddie Qian

Background

-   There is a normal influx of fluid into the pleural space due to
    leaky capillary membranes and the pleural space's negative pressure.
    This fluid is constantly reabsorbed by lymphatics. An imbalance in
    the system will result in accumulation.

-   Examples of dysfunction in homeostasis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Increased influx: ↑ filtration from the capillaries from high
    intravascular hydrostatic pressure (e.g. heart failure, renal
    failure) or low intravascular oncotic pressure

-   Other liquid entry into the pleural space through anatomic deficits:
    CSF, chyle, urine, blood, ascites (the diaphragm is naturally
    porous)

-   Decreased efflux: obstruction of the parietal pleural stoma (from
    protein or cellular debris in exudative pleural effusions)

-   Increased systemic venous pressure: lymphatic system drains into the
    systemic venous circulation so high venous pressure prevents
    lymphatics from draining appropriately

Presentation

-   May be asymptomatic

-   Chest pain: usually pleuritic via parietal pleural innervation

-   Dyspnea and tachypnea without hypoxia (unless concurrent airspace
    disease): Dyspnea is thought to be mediated by branches of the
    phrenic n. that are under pressure from effusion

-   Exam: ↓ breath sounds, ↓ chest wall excursion, ↓ tactile fremitus,
    dullness to percussion

Evaluation

-   CXR: Ideally supine AP, lateral upright and decubitus lateral. Fluid
    accumulates first in subpulmonic space and then in posterior
    costophrenic recess

-   50cc: Visible in posterior costophrenic angle on lateral film

-   200cc: Visible on AP costophrenic angle on AP film

-   500cc: Obliteration of hemidiaphragm

-   If effusion moves with gravity, suggests free flowing

-   POCUS: assess size, location, loculations

-   CT with contrast: not always indicated; helpful to evaluate
    septations

-   Thoracentesis: see "Procedures section"

    Interpretation of pleural studies

-   Obtain pleural LDH, protein, cell count/diff, gram stain w/ culture,
    pH. Consider pleural cytology, hematocrit, triglyceride, glucose,
    and amylase. Need serum LDH and protein.

-   Lights criteria: 1 of the following to be considered an exudative
    effusion

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pleural to serum protein ratio \> 0.5

-   Pleural to serum LDH ratio \> 0.6

-   Pleural LDH \> 2/3 upper limit of normal range of serum LDH

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Transudative: CHF exacerbation, hepatic hydrothorax, atelectasis
    (caused by increased intrapleural negative pressure),
    hypoalbuminemia, renal failure

-   Exudative: infections (bacterial, TB, fungal), malignant,
    rheumatologic, PE

-   Hemothorax: pleural hematocrit \>50% of blood hematocrit

-   Chylothorax: pleural TG \>100mg/dl

-   Concern for esophageal rupture: elevated salivary amylase

-   Other tips:

-   Protein: \>5 think TB or malignancy, \< 0.5 think urine, CSF,
    peritoneal dialysate

-   Glucose: \< 60 think about malignancy, TB, or rheumatologic, less
    likely hemothorax or parapneumonic

-   Cell count/diff: polys represent an acute process, monocytes
    represent a chronic process, lymphocytes think about TB or
    malignancy, eosinophils think about air/blood, TB, malignancy,
    asbestos, drugs

-   Two separate processes may co-occur, and a transudate may mask an
    exudative effusion; if concerned for this and you have clinical
    stability, trial diuresis prior to thoracentesis

    Management

-   Parapneumonic effusion: most common exudative process

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Uncomplicated: systemic antibiotic for pneumonia

-   Complicated (positive culture or gram stain, OR loculated OR
    pH\<7.20 OR glucose less than 60): needs chest tube + MIST2 protocol
    (intrapleural alteplase 10 mg BID in 30 mL of saline AND
    intrapleural DNase 5 mg BID in 30 mL of water for a total of 3 days)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hepatic hydrothorax: Avoid chest tubes. Cirrhosis medical management
    ± TIPS. Spontaneous bacterial empyema might occur. Perform
    thoracentesis if suspected.

-   Tuberculosis effusions: Treat as active TB. Often resolves with
    treatment.

-   Malignant pleural effusion: If cytology isolates malignant cells in
    pleural space, this often automatically classifies that malignancy
    as an advanced/metastatic stage. Tends to recur.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If recurrent, either do 1) serial thoracentesis, 2) PleurX catheter
    (tunneled chest tube) or 3) chemical pleurodesis (obliteration of
    pleural space with talc or tetracycline)

Pulmonary Hypertension -- Spencer Lessans, Pakinam Mekki

Classification

+-------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------+
| WHO Group   | Pathophysiology    | Etiologies                        |
+=============+====================+===================================+
| Group 1.    | Proliferation and  | Idiopathic, heritable (BMPR2      |
| Primary     | hyperplasia of     | mutation),                        |
| pulmonary   | vascular wall      | drug-induced/toxin-induced        |
| arterial    | leading to         | (methamphetamine, Fen-Phen),      |
| h           | increased          | connective tissue disease         |
| ypertension | pulmonary vascular | (scleroderma), HIV, portal HTN,   |
|             | resistance         | congenital heart disease L-\>R    |
|             |                    | shunts (ASD,VSD,PAD),             |
|             |                    | schistosomiasis (#1 cause of PAH  |
|             |                    | worldwide),                       |
|             |                    |                                   |
|             |                    | 1' pulmonary veno-occlusive       |
|             |                    | disease (PVOD) Pulmonary          |
|             |                    | capillary hemangiomatosis         |
+-------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Group 2.    | Elevated end       | HFrEF, HFpEF, and valvular        |
| Left heart  | diastolic filling  | disease                           |
| disease     | pressure.          |                                   |
|             | Increased PCWP.    |                                   |
+-------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Group 3.    | Hypoxic pulmonary  | COPD, ILD, OSA, chronic           |
| Lung        | vasoconstriction   | high-altitude exposure,           |
| diseases or | leads to vascular  | developmental lung disorders,     |
| chronic     | bed remodeling     | chronic alveolar hypoventilation  |
| hypoxemia   |                    |                                   |
+-------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Group 4.    | Chronic pulmonary  | Thrombotic and non-thrombotic     |
| Chronic     | embolism.          | emboli (parasites, foreign        |
| thr         |                    | bodies, tumor)                    |
| omboembolic | Incomplete         |                                   |
| pulmonary   | fibrinolysis and   |                                   |
| h           | organization of    |                                   |
| ypertension | thrombus           |                                   |
| (CTEPH)     |                    |                                   |
+-------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------+
| Group 5.    | Varied             | Hematologic disorders (sickle     |
| Mul         |                    | cell disease in particular),      |
| tifactorial |                    | chronic hemolytic anemia,         |
|             |                    | sarcoidosis, pulmonary Langerhans |
|             |                    | cell histiocytosis, fibrosing     |
|             |                    | mediastinitis, metabolic          |
|             |                    | disorders                         |
+-------------+--------------------+-----------------------------------+

Presentation

-   Symptoms: exertional dyspnea, presyncope, fatigue, exertional chest
    pain, edema; syncope is a very concerning symptom

-   Physical exam: JVD, widely split S2, holosystolic tricuspid
    regurgitation murmur, pulmonary diastolic murmur (Graham Steel),
    hepatomegaly, ascites, edema

-   Main chief complaint for admission: volume overload secondary to RV
    failure and/or hypoxia

Evaluation

-   Labs: BNP, CMP, HIV, rheumatologic serologies (ANA w/reflex ENA,
    RF/CCP, ANCA, Scl-70, Ro/La), blood gas (↑ A-a gradient, ↓ PaO2, ↓
    PCO2; rule out hypercapnia from alveolar hypoventilation)

-   EKG: right atrial enlargement (peaked P waves), RBBB, RV hypertrophy

-   PFT: rule out obstructive and restrictive disease; PAH usually has
    mild restriction with mild DLCO impairment

-   Sleep studies: evaluation for chronic hypoxemia from OSA; if low
    suspicion for OSA/CSA, can start with overnight oximetry

-   6-min walk test: important for prognostication, baseline exertional
    capacity, and to evaluate treatment response

-   Imaging

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   TTE with bubble: RVSP \>35-40 is concerning for PH. TTE can show
    evidence of RV dilation and dysfunction (TAPSE \<1.6cm), RRA
    dilation, septal flattening, pericardial effusion. It should
    evaluate for classification by quantifying L heart disease and
    shunt.

-   CT angiogram: evaluates for acute and chronic thrombi using contrast
    media; consider V/Q scan in setting of AKI and advanced CKD (discuss
    risk and benefits)

-   V/Q scan: better performance in evaluating small chronic embolism in
    contrast to CTA

-   High res CT: evaluates parenchymal lung disease, dilation of the
    pulmonary artery, RV size

    Diagnosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   May be suspected from clinical presentation and indirect surrogate
    markers of elevated PAP

-   A right heart catheterization is the gold standard for PH diagnosis
    and will differentiate between precapillary and postcapillary PH

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Nitric oxide challenge during RHC assesses for drug response

-   Fluid challenge with 500ml LR during RHC assesses left heart
    compliance

+-----------------------+---------------------------+------------------+
| Definitions           | Characteristics           | Causes           |
+=======================+===========================+==================+
| Pre-capillary PH      | mPAP \> 20 mmHg           | Groups 1, 3, 4,  |
|                       |                           | 5                |
|                       | PAWP ≤ 15 mmHg            |                  |
|                       |                           |                  |
|                       | PVR ≥ 3 WU                |                  |
+-----------------------+---------------------------+------------------+
| Post-capillary PH     | mPAP \> 20 mmHg           | Group 2          |
|                       |                           |                  |
|                       | PAWP \> 15 mmHg           |                  |
|                       |                           |                  |
|                       | PVR \< 3 WU               |                  |
+-----------------------+---------------------------+------------------+
| Combined pre- and     | mPAP \> 20 mmHg           | Group 2, 5       |
| post-                 |                           |                  |
|                       | PAWP \> 15 mmHg           |                  |
| capillary PH          |                           |                  |
|                       | PVR ≥ 3 WU                |                  |
+-----------------------+---------------------------+------------------+

Management

-   immunizations: yearly influenza, COVID, pneumococcal

-   Counsel to strongly avoid pregnancy

-   Identify decompensation triggers: progression of underlying disease,
    medication/dietary nonadherence, infection, arrhythmia, myocardial
    infarction/RV ischemia, shunting via PFO, pulmonary embolism

-   Treatment: aimed at preventing right heart failure, increasing
    vasoactive molecules (preventing further remodeling), symptom
    relief/quality of life, functional class (NYHA class)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Oxygenation goal \>90%

-   Diuresis: do not be aggressive, these pts are preload dependent

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consult pulmonary hypertension if considering starting or changing
    PH medications.

    Medications

-   Anticoagulation: For pts with confirmed CTEPH. Should be worked up
    for hypercoagulability including antiphospholipid syndrome.
    Pulmonary endarterectomy may be considered.

-   Oral CCB: used in pts who had a positive vasoreactive challenge on
    RHC

-   PAH-specific vasoactive medications (in order of escalation)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NO enhancers

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PDE5-inhibitors: sildenafil, tadalafil

-   Soluble guanylate cyclase stimulant: riociguat

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Endothelin receptor antagonists (ERAs): Bosentan, macitenatan,
    ambrisentan

-   Prostacyclin analogs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Prostacyclin analogs increase cAMP-mediated pulmonary vasodilation

-   Side effects include jaw pain, flushing, arthralgias, and diarrhea

-   IV formulations are administered through a continuous pump. Never
    stop IV prostacyclins since even brief pauses can cause rebound
    vasoconstriction and death.

    -   Epoprostenol: IV (Veletri) or inhaled (Flolan); half-life 4
        minutes

    -   Treprostinil: IV/subcutaneous/inhaled/PO; half-life 4 hours

    -   Iloprost: inhaled, half-life minutes

    -   Selexipag (Uptravi): PO, half-life hours

-   BMPR2-targeted therapies (eg, sotatercept) are under investigation
    for PAH

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Balloon atrial septostomy: creation of a R-\>L shunt to offload the
    RV which reduces SpO2 but overall improved peripheral tissues DO2.
    Palliative procedure or bridge.

-   VA ECMO can be used as bridge to medical therapy or for lung
    transplant.

-   Lung transplantation can be considered for pts who are candidates
    and failing maximal medical therapy

-   Treatment escalation is based on a pt's NYHA functional
    classification

    -   Class I: no treatment or monotherapy

    -   Class II: monotherapy or combination oral therapy

    -   Class III: combination oral therapy or prostacyclin

    -   Class IV: prostacyclin ± oral therapy

        Poor prognostic factors

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   NYHA Functional Class III and IV

-   6-minute walk test less than 300 meters

-   The present of AKI and/or hyponatremia

-   Low SBP (SBP \< 90) when connective tissue disease or liver disease
    is the etiology

-   Poor hemodynamics on RHC (right atrial pressure \> 20 mmHg; cardiac
    index less than 2)

-   TTE findings: tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE,
    marker of global RV function) \< 1.8, the presence of a pericardial
    effusion, and severe RV dysfunction

Airway Clearance Therapy -- Patrick Barney

Indications

-   Cystic fibrosis, advanced COPD, chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis,
    chronic neuromuscular weakness, prolonged ventilator-dependence

-   Goal is to assist pts with removing/expectorating mucus from lungs
    to decrease risk of atelectasis, mucus plug, increased airway
    resistance, infection

    Therapies

-   Chest Physiotherapy (CPT)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Use: pathologies w/ retained secretions and mucous plugging (CF,
    bronchiectasis)

-   RT helps pt go through sequence of positions aimed at "draining"
    each of the lobes of the lung by gravity. Sometimes combined with
    percussion

-   Finding in Epic: chest physiotherapy \> CPPD panel -- will initiate
    RT bronchial hygiene protocol and order TID CPT

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High Frequency Chest Wall Compression (HFCWC)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Use: pathologies w/ retained secretions (CF, bronchiectasis, chronic
    bronchitis) or mucociliary clearance problems (lung transplant)

-   RT wraps pt in inflatable vest, compressor rapidly inflates and
    deflates vest to "break up" thickened mucus from airway wall so it
    can be suctioned or expectorated

-   Finding in Epic: vest \> Facility List \> vest physiotherapy or vest
    physiotherapy for CF under Procedures

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Positive Expiratory Pressure (PEP)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Use: pathologies w/ retained secretions as discussed above

-   Pt exhales against fixed or fluttering resistor that allows air to
    get behind mucus, helps move mucus from airway walls, and holds
    airways open longer for improved ventilation

-   Trade names- Flutter, Acapella, AerobikA

-   Finding in Epic: PEP \> Facility List \> PEP therapy panel or
    Oscillatory PEP therapy panel under Order Sets

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can also find in a supply closet on 8S and bring to pt, be sure to
    teach them how to use it

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cough Assist

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Use: most effective in pts with neuromuscular weakness affecting
    diaphragmatic strength -- muscular dystrophy, myasthenia gravis,
    spinal cord lesions, SMA

-   Via mask or trach/vent connection -- applies positive pressure to
    fill the lungs, then quickly switches to negative pressure to
    produce a high expiratory flow rate to simulate a cough that is
    intended to produce expectorant

-   Finding in Epic: cough assist \> Facility List \> cough assist
    treatment panel under order sets

Chest Tubes -- Pakinam Mekki

Background

-   Nomenclature: Small bore chest tubes= Pigtail Catheters (Often 8-12
    Fr) placed via Seldinger technique. "Chest Tube" technically denotes
    a large bore, surgical thoracostomy tube (Often 24-40 Fr)

-   Indications: Pneumothorax, hemothorax (more often surgical chest
    tubes), empyema, malignant effusion (pt specific), chylothorax,
    penetrating chest trauma

-   Contraindications: No absolute contraindications. Relative
    contraindications include hepatic hydrothorax, large emphysematous
    blebs, and anticoagulation or coagulopathy

Procedure

-   Consult pulmonology for pts who may need pigtail chest tube

-   Placement and Sizing

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The location and size of the chest tube is related to the pathology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pneumothorax anterior near the apex of the lung in the 2nd
    intercostal space, midaxillary line

-   Fluid (water, pus, blood), posterior near the base of the lung
    (fifth or sixth intercostal space, midaxillary line

-   Hemothorax surgical chest tube is placed to prevent clot formation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Potential complications: Laceration of an intercostal vessel, organ
    perforation (lung, heart, diaphragm, intraabdominal), trauma of the
    intercostal neurovascular bundle, subcutaneous emphysema,
    pneumothorax, infection, re-expansion pulmonary edema

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Smaller size results in less tissue disruption but more likely to
    clog or kink

**Understanding the Atrium:** After the chest tube is placed, it is
connected to the Atrium which can be connected to the wall for suction.
(See Diagram below)

![A picture containing text, electronics Description automatically
generated](media/image39.png){width="2.07951334208224in"
height="1.9551279527559056in"}[(A) Dry suction control-]{.underline}
determines the level of suction out of the chest tube and is set by the
provider. It is important to note that while the atrium is linked to the
wall suction via suction port (H), the level of wall suction is
determined by (A)

[(B) Water seal chamber-]{.underline} if the atrium is disconnected from
the wall suction, it is on "water seal" (i.e., to gravity). This allows
for the one-way flow of pleural space contents out of the chest.

[(C) Air leak monitor-]{.underline} if air bubbles are present in the
water seal chamber, then that indicates the presence of air in the
pleural space. The presence of air is different from normal "tidaling,"
within the water seal and requires troubleshooting (see below). Tidaling
is normal; it is the movement with respiratory variation in water seal
chamber. The water should rise with inspiration and fall with
expiration.

[(D) Collection chamber-]{.underline} drains the pleural fluid contents
via the chest tube.

[(E) Suction verification window]{.underline}- will be orange if suction
is on and atrium is functioning appropriately

Troubleshooting

-   Air leaks: If bubbles are present in the water seal chamber, this
    indicates air in the pleural space. This is an expected finding in a
    pneumothorax; over time, the air leak should disappear as the lung
    re-expands. This contrasts with normal tidaling present with
    respiratory variation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   There are two major causes of air leaks:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Persistent air in the pleural space, seen in alveolar-pleural
    fistula or pneumothorax (new or old)

-   Leak in the chest tubing at its insertion site or in the tubing
    system. To identify the etiology of a new air leak, try clamping the
    chest tube at various point, obtain a CXR

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Clogging: Would see debris in the collection chamber and lack of
    tidaling in the water seal camber

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In pts with viscous fluid output (ex- empyema), important to flush
    the chest tube with normal saline flushes at least twice daily to
    prevent clogging

-   For clog- try flushing 10cc of sterile saline toward the pt or
    "stripping" the chest tube by pressing the chest tube with your
    fingers and pulling towards the drainage system.

-   May require tPA or dornase for fibrinolysis, discuss with team that
    placed the tube

Chest tube removal

-   Generally, chest tubes are removed when there is \< 150cc of
    drainage in 24 hrs (if placed for pleural effusion)

-   For pneumothorax, there is typically a step-wise approach to
    removal. The team that placed the chest tube will guide removal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Suction -\> water seal -\> ± clamp trial. CXR obtain after each
    transition to monitor for reaccumulation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Chest tube should be removed while pt hums (to prevent inhalation
    during removal that could introduce air into pleural space). Pigtail
    catheters must be "unlocked" prior to removal to release the pigtail

Home Oxygen Therapies -- Mackenzie Samson

Summary of Medicare Part B Guidelines for Home Oxygen:

-   Conditions for which oxygen therapy may be covered

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Severe lung disease including COPD and ILD, CF, bronchiectasis,
    widespread neoplasms

-   Hypoxia related symptoms or findings expected to improve with O2:
    pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale, erythrocytosis, impaired
    cognition, nocturnal restlessness, morning headache

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Qualifying Tests and Requirements:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Testing must be performed with a pt in chronic stable condition or
    within two days of discharge from an inpt hospital stay (after
    treatment of acute exacerbating conditions)

-   Criteria: Resting SpO2 ≤ 88% (or PaO2 \<55) or SpO2 \<88% with
    ambulation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Must be documented in chart

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Special Considerations:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Medicare requires an additional walk on 4L/min showing desaturation
    if the pt needs a flow rate of 5L/min or higher

-   Because of the risk of desaturation with exertion and the intrinsic
    error in the pulse ox (around 3%), pts with resting SpO2 ≤ 92%
    should have amb sats checked

-   Pts with Raynaud's or poor circulation may have inaccurate finger
    pulse oximeter readings. Consider using a head saturation monitor

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   VA Specific Guidance: Will need to document ambulatory saturations
    in notes as above. Call the Oxygen Clinic (number listed in all team
    rooms) and talk with your case manager

Summary of Medicare Part C Guidelines for Home Respiratory Assist
Devices i.e. CPAP/BiPAP:

-   Restrictive thoracic disorders, covered if the following criteria
    are met:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Documentation of a neuromuscular disease/severe thoracic cage
    abnormality AND one of the following:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PaCO2 ≥ 45 mmHg on ABG, performed while awake and on home O2
    requirement

-   Sleep oximetry demonstrates oxygen saturation ≤ 88% for ≥ 5 minutes
    of nocturnal recording time performed while on home O2 requirement

-   For a neuromuscular disease (only), either: Maximal inspiratory
    pressure \< 60cm H2O or forced vital capacity \< 50% predicted and
    COPD may not contribute significantly

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Severe COPD, covered if the following criteria are met:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PaCO2 ≥ 52 mmHg on ABG, performed while awake and on pt's prescribed
    home O2

-   Sleep oximetry demonstrates oxygen saturation ≤ 88% for ≥ 5 minutes
    of nocturnal recording time, performed while breathing oxygen at
    2LPM or pt's prescribed FiO2 (whichever is higher). Also requires
    that OSA had been considered and ruled out (formal sleep testing not
    required)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hypoventilation Syndrome: covered if criteria 1, 2, AND either 3 or
    4 are met:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   PaCO2 ≥45 mmHg on ABG, performed while awake and on home O2
    requirement, AND

-   Spirometry shows an FEV1/FVC ≥ 70% AND

-   ABG PaCO2, performed during sleep or immediately upon awakening that
    demonstrates worsening PaCO2 of ≥ 7 mmHg compared to the original
    result in criterion 1 OR

-   A facility-based PSG or HST demonstrates oxygen saturation ≤ 88% for
    ≥ 5 minutes of nocturnal recording time that is not caused by
    obstructive upper airway events

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   OSA

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   An initial screening for OSA in the hospital is nocturnal pulse
    oximetry. The distinct "saw-tooth" pattern representing intermittent
    hypoxia is suggestive of OSA, and a formal NPSG or home sleep test
    is recommended to evaluate for OSA.  This is done on an outpt basis
    only once acute issues have fully resolved

-   Home CPAP/BiPAP covered IF:

-   The diagnosis of central sleep apnea or complex sleep apnea and

-   Significant improvement of the sleep-associated hypoventilation
    occurs with the use of the device

Inhaler Therapy -- Rafael J. Fernandez III, Patrick Barney

Medication delivery methods

+-----------+------------------+--------------+---+------------------+
| Device    | Description      | Pros         |   | Cons             |
+===========+==================+==============+===+==================+
| Metered   | Typical handheld | If used      | R |                  |
| dose      | inhaler. Pt must | correctly,   | e |                  |
| inhaler   | be able to time  | same dose of | q |                  |
| (MDI)     | 3-5s slow        | medicine     | u |                  |
|           | inhalation and   | with each    | i |                  |
|           | 5-10s breath     | use.         | r |                  |
|           | hold with        |              | e |                  |
|           | release of       |              | s |                  |
|           | medice           |              | c |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | d |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | . |                  |
|           |                  |              |   |                  |
|           |                  |              | M |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | y |                  |
|           |                  |              | b |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | u |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | d |                  |
|           |                  |              | w |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | h |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | p |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | c |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | h |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | q |                  |
|           |                  |              | u |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | c |                  |
|           |                  |              | l |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | g |                  |
|           |                  |              | . |                  |
+-----------+------------------+--------------+---+------------------+
| Soft mist | Releases a mist  | Does not     | M |                  |
| inhaler   | that lasts       | need         | u |                  |
| (SMI)     | longer and is    | c            | s |                  |
|           | slower than MDIs | oordination. | t |                  |
|           |                  | Does not     | b |                  |
|           |                  | depend on    | e |                  |
|           |                  | inspiratory  | p |                  |
|           |                  | effort.      | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | m |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | d |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | f |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | u |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | d |                  |
|           |                  |              | f |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | q |                  |
|           |                  |              | u |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | l |                  |
|           |                  |              | y |                  |
|           |                  |              | . |                  |
+-----------+------------------+--------------+---+------------------+
| Dry       | Delivers a fine  | Less         | D |                  |
| powder    | powder of        | irritative.  | e |                  |
| inhaler   | medication when  | Env          | p |                  |
| (DPI)     | inhaling.        | ironmentally | e |                  |
|           |                  | friendly (no | n |                  |
|           |                  | HFA --       | d |                  |
|           |                  | p            | e |                  |
|           |                  | ropellants). | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | p |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | y |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | f |                  |
|           |                  |              | f |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | . |                  |
|           |                  |              | M |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | g |                  |
|           |                  |              | h |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | b |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | u |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | b |                  |
|           |                  |              | l |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | f |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | p |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | w |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | h |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | u |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | m |                  |
|           |                  |              | u |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | c |                  |
|           |                  |              | u |                  |
|           |                  |              | l |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | w |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | k |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | . |                  |
|           |                  |              | I |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | c |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | d |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | u |                  |
|           |                  |              | g |                  |
|           |                  |              | d |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | d |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | l |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | v |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | y |                  |
+-----------+------------------+--------------+---+------------------+
| Nebulizer | Liquid           | Easier to    | S |                  |
|           | medications are  | breath       | h |                  |
|           | aerosolized, pt  |              | o |                  |
|           | breathes them in |              | r |                  |
|           | using a mask or  |              | t |                  |
|           | mouthpiece       |              | - |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | c |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | g |                  |
|           |                  |              | , |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | x |                  |
|           |                  |              | p |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | v |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | . |                  |
|           |                  |              | U |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | d |                  |
|           |                  |              | p |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | m |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | l |                  |
|           |                  |              | y |                  |
|           |                  |              | f |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | p |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | w |                  |
|           |                  |              | h |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | c |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | c |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | d |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | h |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | l |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | h |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | v |                  |
|           |                  |              | e |                  |
|           |                  |              | p |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | n |                  |
|           |                  |              | s |                  |
|           |                  |              | p |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | o |                  |
|           |                  |              | r |                  |
|           |                  |              | y |                  |
|           |                  |              | c |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | p |                  |
|           |                  |              | a |                  |
|           |                  |              | c |                  |
|           |                  |              | i |                  |
|           |                  |              | t |                  |
|           |                  |              | y |                  |
|           |                  |              | ( |                  |
|           |                  |              | F |                  |
|           |                  |              | E |                  |
|           |                  |              | V |                  |
|           |                  |              | 1 |                  |
|           |                  |              | \ |                  |
|           |                  |              | < |                  |
|           |                  |              | 1 |                  |
|           |                  |              | L |                  |
|           |                  |              | ) |                  |
+-----------+------------------+--------------+---+------------------+

Videos Demonstrating Appropriate Techniques
<https://www.nationaljewish.org/conditions/medications/inhaled-medication-asthma-inhaler-copd-inhaler/instructional-videos>

Nebulizers

-   Bronchodilators

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Short-acting beta agonist (SABA): beta-2 agonism of bronchial smooth
    muscle for bronchodilation; also decreases mast cell mediator
    release). Ex: albuterol, levalbuterol

-   Long-acting begat agonist (LABA): same as SABA but have lipophilic
    side changes that allow longer binding and slow onset of action. Ex:
    formoterol, salmeterol, olodaterol

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Corticosteroids (budesonide, fluticasone, mometasone): suppress
    airway inflammation

-   Anticholinergics

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   COPD and asthma exacerbation: bronchodilation and secretion
    inhibition in acute setting

-   Ipratropium (Atrivent) intermittent nebulizer or
    Ipratropium-ambuterol (Duo-Neb) intermittent or continuous
    nebulizer; long acting Yupelri (revefenacin)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Hypertonic saline, NS, 3% and 7%: Can be used to thin secretions and
    produce deep cough in pts who need to expectorate as part of
    treatment. For CF, chronic tracheostomy, NM weakness. No evidence
    for benefit in COPD

-   Enzymatic Agents (Dornase alpha/Pulmozyme/DNAse): enzyme that breaks
    down polymerized DNA in high concentrations in CF airways; indicated
    specifically for CF pts

-   Disulfide disruptors

    -   Sever disulfide bonds of glycoproteins in mucus, lowering its
        viscosity and making it more amenable to suction, expectoration

    -   N-acetylcysteine (Mucomyst) - nebulized form available in "adult
        burn inhalation injury protocol" when search "mucomyst"

-   Prostacyclin (e.g. epoprostenol): Prostaglandin analog used for
    pulmonary hypertension. Requires Pulmonary approval. Largely used
    for rescue with refractory hypoxia in ARDS

    Antibiotics

-   May be indicated in pts with CF, non-CF bronchiectasis, VAP as
    salvage therapy

-   Tobramycin: only nebulized antibiotic available at VUMC

-   Pentamidine: nebulized antibiotic for PJP prophylaxis, given
    once/month

VUMC Inpt Options

-   SABA : Albuterol (Proventil/Ventolin/Proair) - MDI, neb, continuous
    aerosol available

-   SABA/SAMA: Ipratropium-albuterol (Duo-Neb) - neb and continuous neb
    available

-   LABA -- only available in combination w/ ICS. LABA/ICS:
    vilanterol-fluticasone (Breo Ellipta), salmeterol-fluticasone
    (Advair Diskus/HFA)

-   LAMA: Tiotropium (Spiriva Respimat)

-   ICS: Budesonide inhaler (Pulmicort) or neb, fluticasone furoate
    (Arnuity Ellipta)

-   Triple therapies (Trelegy/Breztri) are NOT available inpt. Combine
    ICS/LABA with LAMA as replacement.

Radiology

Editors: Jennifer Huang, MD, Anthony Micetich, MD

Reviewed by Reza Imani, MD

Common Radiology Exams by Suspected Diagnosis

+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Musculoskeletal          |                                           |
+==========================+===========================================+
| Fracture                 | X-rays, CT (extremity) without contrast   |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Soft tissue infection    | CT (extremity) with contrast              |
|                          |                                           |
|                          | MRI (extremity) with and without contrast |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Osteomyelitis            | X-ray (extremity)                         |
|                          |                                           |
|                          | MRI (extremity) with and without contrast |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| Bone or soft tissue      | MRI (extremity) with and without contrast |
| tumors                   |                                           |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------+
| DVT                      | Ultrasound doppler (extremity) venous     |
|                          | (laterality)                              |
+--------------------------+-------------------------------------------+

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Chest                      
  -------------------------- --------------------------------------------
  Pulmonary embolism         CT angiogram chest pulmonary embolism with
                             contrast

  Lung mass, metastases      CT chest with contrast

  Pulmonary nodule           CT chest without contrast

  Pneumothorax               X-ray chest portable (or 2 view), SPECIFY
                             UPRIGHT

  Acute aortic syndrome      CT angiogram aorta without and with contrast
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

+-----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
| Abdomen/Pelvic        |                                              |
+=======================+==============================================+
| Cholecystitis         | Ultrasound abdomen limited (specify          |
|                       | cholecystitis)                               |
+-----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
| Pancreatitis          | CT abdomen pelvis with contrast              |
+-----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
| Appendicitis          | CT abdomen pelvis with contrast              |
+-----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
| Bowel obstruction     | X-ray abdomen 1 view, CT abdomen pelvis with |
|                       | contrast                                     |
+-----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
| HCC                   | CT abdomen with contrast, specify HCC in     |
|                       | comments                                     |
|                       |                                              |
|                       | MRI abdomen with contrast, specify HCC in    |
|                       | comments                                     |
+-----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
| Mesenteric            | CT angiogram abdomen and pelvis              |
| ischemia/AAA          |                                              |
+-----------------------+----------------------------------------------+
| Crohn's/IBD           | CT abdomen pelvis enterography with contrast |
+-----------------------+----------------------------------------------+

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Neurologic                 
  -------------------------- --------------------------------------------
  Brain mass/metastases      MRI brain with and without IV contrast

  Stroke                     MRI brain without contrast

  Multiple sclerosis         MRI brain with and without contrast

  Aneurysm or vascular       CT angiogram head and neck with and without
  injury                     contrast

  Dural venous sinus         CT venogram head
  thrombosis                 

  Intracranial hemorrhage    CT head without contrast

  Spine trauma               CT (c/t/l) spine without contrast, MRI spine
                             wo contrast

  Spine tumor, infection,    MRI (C/T/L) spine with and without contrast
  post-op                    
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

+------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Urogenital             |                                             |
+========================+=============================================+
| Ovarian/testicular     | Ultrasound scrotal with complete doppler    |
| torsion                |                                             |
|                        | Ultrasound pelvic transvaginal              |
+------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Ectopic pregnancy      | Ultrasound transvaginal and pelvic          |
+------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Kidney stones          | Ultrasound renal                            |
|                        |                                             |
|                        | CT abdomen pelvis without contrast          |
+------------------------+---------------------------------------------+
| Pyelonephritis         | Ultrasound renal. CT abdomen pelvis with    |
|                        | contrast                                    |
+------------------------+---------------------------------------------+

See ACR appropriateness criteria for additional Information.
(https://www.acr.org/Clinical-Resources/ACR-Appropriateness-Criteria)

Basic Abdominal X-ray Interpretation

Often referred to as a KUB or GUAB film.

As with chest radiographs, use a systematic approach. Here are some
important reminders:

-   Positioning

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Supine films poorly evaluate for free air, but are fine for
    evaluating bowel gas pattern and tube positioning

-   Upright (preferred) or left lateral decubitus are more sensitive for
    free air

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lines/Tubes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Enteric tubes come in two general types at VUH -- NG/Suction (one
    radiopaque line) and Dobhoff/Feeding (two radiopaque lines with an
    opaque tip) 

-   Enteric tubes should course midline inferior to the carina before
    taking a smooth rightward curve below the diaphragm and past the GE
    junction 

-   Ideally, the tip and terminal sidehole of an NG tube should be below
    and oriented away from the GEJ 

-   If post-pyloric placement is desired, the tube should terminate
    right of midline and resemble the "C-loop" of the duodenum 

-   NGT radiograph will not include the lower abdomen or upper chest, so
    cannot fully evaluate bowel gas pattern. If the NGT is in the
    patient but not seen on the film, confirm that it is not coiled in
    the oropharynx, esophagus, or airway (confirm with CXR if
    necessary) 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bowel

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Small bowel should be \<3 cm, Large \<6 cm, Cecum \<9 cm; however a
    normal abdominal plain film cannot rule out obstruction 

-   Presence of air in the rectum generally favors ileus rather than
    obstruction 

-   Some seek to quantify stool burden by abdominal plain film, but this
    is insensitive and without objective thresholds

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pathologic Gas

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Look for lucency adjacent to straight, opaque structures inclyding
    the diaphragm, liver, and falciform (football sign)

-   Subdiaphragmatic

-   Outlines the serosal border of bowel (Rigler sign)

-   Bowel wall shouldn't have gas (pneumatosis)

-   Liver gas can be pneumobilia (prior ERCP/stent) or portal venous gas
    (from ischemic bowel)

![An x-ray of a person\'s body Description automatically
generated](media/image40.jpg){width="0.9583125546806649in"
height="1.0313856080489938in"}![X-ray of a person\'s chest Description
automatically generated](media/image41.png){width="0.96875in"
height="1.0599136045494313in"}

Rigler's (double wall) sign  Football sign 

-   Stones and Bones

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Kidney stones (Low dose CT Kidney Stone protocol is the preferred
    imaging modality for surveillance)

-   Incidental rib fractures, spine compression deformities, pelvic/hip
    fractures

-   Ingested foreign bodies

-   Surgical clips, embolic coils

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Masses and Soft Tissue

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The paucity of bowel gas or abnormal contour of intraluminal bowel
    gas can suggest a soft tissue mass in the abdomen, though this is
    better evaluated on CT

-   Kidney margins may be faintly visible, which is normal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bladder: Foley projecting in right location?

Liver

Ascending Colon

Right Kidney

Psoas Major

Small bowel

Post-pyloric Dobhoff

Descending Colon

Splenic Flexure

Basic Abdomen and Pelvis CT Interpretation

Structured search pattern and frequent windowing are important for
evaluation of various structures and organs in the abdomen and pelvis.

-   Soft tissue window: for evaluation of solid organ and soft tissue
    structures

-   Bone windows: to identify fractures or osseous lesions

-   Lung windows: to evaluate lung bases. Also helpful for identifying
    intraperitoneal free air in the abdomen and pelvis.

Example of routine CT abdomen pelvis search pattern and dictation
template:

Lower chest

-   Lung bases: consolidation, aspiration, atelectasis

-   Pleural effusion, pneumothorax

-   Pericardial effusion

**Liver**: assess morphology, enhancement, masses, abscesses, vascular
abnormalities, trauma

-   Liver trauma: laceration, hematoma, hemorrhage

    -   Laceration: irregular linear/branching areas of hypoattenuation

    -   Hematoma: intermediate to hyperdense collection between liver
        parenchyma and capsule

    -   Vascular injury

    -   Active hemorrhage: typically hyperdense compared to normal
        parenchyma

![](media/image44.jpeg){width="1.6118055555555555in"
height="0.9364949693788277in"}

**Gallbladder and Biliary Tract**: evaluate for dense gallstones,
surrounding fat stranding or fluid, dilated biliary ducts

-   ![Cureus \| Acute Interstitial Pancreatitis With a Normal Lipase
    Level in the Background of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Case Report
    \| Article](media/image45.jpeg){width="1.6090277777777777in"
    height="1.2597222222222222in"}

    **Pancreas:** assess morphology, enhancement, lesions, ductal
    dilation, peripancreatic fluid or stranding.

-   Pancreatitis: two subtypes (interstitial edematous \[seen in image\]
    and necrotizing)

-   Parenchymal enlargement, alterations in attenuation, indistinct
    margins, surrounding fat stranding, lack of parenchymal enhancement
    suggests necrosis

**Spleen**: size, enhancement, trauma

**Adrenal Glands**: morphology, masses

**Kidneys and Ureters**: renal size, morphology, enhancement, masses,
hydronephrosis, hydroureter, renal or ureteral stones.

-   Urolithiasis: distal obstructing ureteral calculus with upstream
    hydronephrosis

-   Pyelonephritis: wedge-like regions of parenchymal swelling and
    reduced enhancement relative to normal parenchyma

    -   

    -   Complications: renal or perinephric abscess, renal papillary
        necrosis, emphysematous pyelonephritis (look for bubbly or
        linear streaks of gas, fluid collections with air-fluid levels)

**Urinary Bladder:** not well assessed when decompressed.\
Assess for wall thickening, masses, intraluminal debris, periserosal fat
stranding.

![A close-up of the moon Description automatically generated with medium
confidence](media/image48.jpeg){width="1.4465277777777779in"
height="1.3541666666666667in"}**Gastrointestinal Tract:** morphology of
distal esophagus and stomach, bowel caliber, wall thickness, masses,
mural enhancement, stool burden, appendix

-   Bowel obstruction: Dilated gas or fluid-filled loops of bowel (3-6-9
    cm rule for upper limit of normal size for small bowel, colon, and
    cecum diameter), air-fluid levels, fecal matter in small bowel
    loops, transition point between dilated and collapsed loops of bowel

-   Bowel perforation: assess for free air, pneumatosis, portal venous
    gas

-   Pneumatosis intestinalis: Intramural bowel gas. Linear lucencies or
    rounded bubbly collections.

    -   Can be life-threatening secondary to ischemia, obstruction,
        enteritis/colitis, organ transplantation.\
        Can also be incidental and secondary to benign etiology,\
        making clinical context crucial.

-   

-   Diverticulitis: Pericolonic fat stranding, segmental bowel wall
    thickening, mural hyperenhancement.

    -   Complicated diverticulitis: perforation (free air and fluid),
        abscess formation, fistula formation (usually a chronic
        complication).

-   Appendicitis

    -   Base of appendix located between the ileocecal valve and apex of
        the cecum.

    -   Location of the tip of the appendix and length of the appendix
        are variable.

    -   Appendiceal dilatation (classically \>6mm outer diameter), wall
        thickening and enhancement, intraluminal fluid, periappendiceal
        fat stranding, adjacent cecal thickening.

**Peritoneum:** free air, free fluid, fluid collections, peritoneal or
omental nodularity/implants

-   Small volume of peritoneal fluid may be physiologic in female pts,
    particularly around menses.

-   Fluid is generally hypodense. Hyperdense fluid may suggest
    hemoperitoneum, especially in context of trauma.

**Vasculature:** suboptimally assessed without intravenous contrast,
best assessed with CT angiography

-   Portal, splenic, superior mesenteric veins: evaluate patency

-   IVC: contrast mixing in IVC can appear similar to a hypodense
    filling defect.

-   

-   ![Abdominal aortic aneurysm rupture \| Radiology Reference Article
    \| Radiopaedia.org](media/image51.jpeg){width="1.7694444444444444in"
    height="1.1180555555555556in"}

-   Abdominal aorta

    -   Abdominal aortic aneurysm: focal dilatation \>3 cm in maximum
        transverse diameter.

    -   Ruptured AAA: retroperitoneal hemorrhage adjacent to aneurysm,
        blood extending into perirenal or pararenal spaces or psoas
        muscles. High attenuation crescent representing acute hematoma
        within mural thrombus or aneurysm wall suggests impending
        rupture.

-   Visceral arteries (celiac, splenic, common hepatic, renal, SMA, IMA)

-   Iliac, pelvic, and femoral arteries and veins

**Lymph Nodes:** Throughout the abdomen and pelvis. Evaluate size
(general guideline is \<10mm short axis), morphology, enhancement.

-   Lower chest, upper abdomen (gastrohepatic ligament, celiac,
    portocaval, porta hepatis), retroperitoneum, mesentery, pelvis
    (inguinal, mesorectal, sidewall)

**Reproductive Organs**: generally not well evaluated with CT, can be
used as an adjunct to imaging with ultrasound or MRI

-   Ovarian torsion: enlarged ovary, ovary shifted medially, twisted
    ovarian pedicle in the adnexa, adnexal fat stranding, underlying
    ovarian mass.

-   Pelvic inflammatory disease: tubular adnexal "mass", fallopian tube
    thickening, uterosacral ligament thickening, complex pelvic free
    fluid, pelvic fat stranding or haziness.

**Abdominal Wall:** hernias, hematomas, solid or cystic masses,
skin/soft tissue infection

**Musculoskeletal:** important to assess using bone windows

-   Fractures

-   Destructive osseous lesions

-   Degenerative changes

Additional Resources for Abdomen and Pelvis CT Interpretation:

<https://radiopaedia.org/cases/how-to-read-a-ct-of-the-abdomen-and-pelvis?lang=us>

<https://pubs.rsna.org/doi/10.1148/rg.210129>

Gastrointestinal Fluoroscopy

Though plain film radiography and CT are crucial diagnostic tools, they
are limited by their ability to only capture images at one point in
time. Fluoroscopy allows for dynamic and functional imaging, which is
often invaluable in evaluating gastrointestinal pathologies. 

-   Esophagram

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The exact technique varies by radiologist and the study indication;
    generally, the patient swallows several contrast boluses as images
    are obtained of the pharynx, esophagus, and proximal stomach 

-   Potentially much more sensitive than CT for the evaluation of
    perforation or fistula; however, in the emergent setting a CT
    chest/abdomen with an appropriately timed water-soluble oral
    contrast bolus may suffice 

-   Inpatient exams for indications other than perforation are nearly
    always appropriately deferred to the outpatient setting 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Upper GI

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Imaging is obtained of the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum to the
    ligament of Treitz; no imaging of the jejunum or ileum is obtained 

-   Often utilized for evaluation of esophageal hernias, post-operative
    complications, and gastric outlet obstruction 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Small Bowel Follow Through

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Essentially this is an Upper GI with additional serial images
    obtained to follow the contrast bolus until it reaches the cecum 

-   If obstruction is of concern, a version of this exam can be
    performed (Non-Fluoro SBFT) on the floor; after a period of gastric
    decompression via NGT the patient is instructed to drink 150-300 mL
    of water-soluble contrast while several serial abdominal radiographs
    are obtained until contrast reaches the cecum or the exam is
    aborted 

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Contrast Enemas

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Often called barium enema, which is a misnomer since barium is
    rarely used

-   Typically performed to evaluate suitability of distal bowel for
    ostomy reversal

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dobhoff Tube Placement

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   A common misconception is that there is direct visualization of the
    tube during the placement; in the fluoroscopy suite the radiologists
    are placing tubes in the exact same manner as on the floor 

-   The benefit is purely logistical since radiologists can take an
    immediate spot fluoro image to evaluate the tube position rather
    than needing to wait for an image to be obtained and interpreted 

-   There is no safety benefit and a request for fluoro guided placement
    should not be considered to be above routine priority

Basic Chest X-ray Interpretation

Always use a systematic approach. It doesn't matter what the approach
is, just be consistent. Below is one example of a search patter.

-   Assess quality: AP vs. PA; upright vs. supine; patent positioning;
    Is the whole chest included?

-   Lines/tubes/drains/devices: What lines are present and are they in
    the expected locations? ET tube, central lines, NG tube/Dobhoff,
    Pacemaker, valve replacements

-   Airway: Is the trachea midline?

-   Mediastinum: Is it widened (masses, aortic injury, lymphadenopathy)?

-   Cardiac: Is the heart enlarged (cardiothoracic ratio (maximal
    horizontal cardiac diameter/ maximal horizontal thoracic diameter
    \[inner edge ribs\]) on PA CXR should be about 0.4-0.5)

-   Pleural space: Is there a pneumothorax? Pleural effusion?

-   Rest of image: Look for soft tissue changes---foreign bodies,
    subcutaneous air. Look for bone abnormalities---fractures, masses.
    Look for abdominal pathology---air under the diaphragm, position of
    tubes

    ![Diagram Description automatically
    generated](media/image52.jpeg){width="1.8962346894138233in"
    height="2.3020833333333335in"}![A picture containing indoor, tattoo,
    plant Description automatically
    generated](media/image54.jpeg){width="1.6465277777777778in"
    height="2.3069444444444445in"}

-   1,2-10: first rib, posterior aspect of ribs 2 to 10

-   AK: aortic knob

-   APW: aortopulmonary window

-   BS: breast shadow

-   C, T: carina, tracheal air column

-   CA, GA: colonic air, gastric air

-   CPA: costophrenic angle

-   DA: descending aorta

-   LHB: left heart border (most of which represents the left ventricle,
    the superior aspect represents the left atrial appendage)

-   LPA: left pulmonary artery

-   RC: right clavicle

-   RHB: right heart border (represents the right atrium)

-   PHB: posterior heart border

-   RHD, LHD: right hemidiaphragm, left hemidiaphragm

-   RPA: right pulmonary artery

-   S: scapula

-   RA: retrosternal space

-   RMF: right lung fissure (left major and minor fissures are not
    always visualized)

    Additional resourcees for chest x-ray interpretation

-   https://radiologyassistant.nl/chest/chest-x-ray/basic-interpretation

-   Felson's Principles of Chest Roentgenology: a programed text.
    Available electronically on Eskind Biomedical Library.

-   <https://radiopaedia.org/articles/chest-radiograph-assessment-using-abcdefghi?lang=us>

Basic Non-Contrast Head CT Interpretation

Imaging exam of choice for pts with acute CNS symptoms or traumatic head
injury.

High sensitivity for detection of neurosurgical emergencies (acute
intracranial hemorrhage, mass effect, territorial infarct, brain
herniation, or hydrocephalus).

Mnemonic for framework of quick Head CT review: **Blood Can Be Very
Bad.**

![Epidural hematoma -- Doctor
Guidelines](media/image55.jpeg){width="1.1819444444444445in"
height="1.3034722222222221in"}Blood

Appearance of blood varies by timing. Acute blood is hyperdense (bright
white). Subacute (\~1 week) blood becomes isodense to brain parenchyma.
Chronic (\>2 weeks) blood is hypodense (dark).

-   Epidural Hemorrhage (extra-axial)

-   Bleeding between dura mater and skull

-   Does not cross skull sutures, expands inwards toward the brain
    parenchyma. Lentiform shape.

-   Often preceded by history of trauma, injury to middle meningeal
    artery (look for associated scalp injury, skull fracture)

    ![Subdural hematoma -- Doctor
    Guidelines](media/image56.jpeg){width="0.8222222222222222in"
    height="0.9777777777777777in"}![Subdural hematoma -- Doctor
    Guidelines](media/image57.jpeg){width="0.9013888888888889in"
    height="1.03125in"}

-   Subdural Hemorrhage (extra-axial)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Bleeding between dura and arachnoid mater.

-   Does cross skull sutures. Crescent shape.

-   Typically secondary to trauma with injury to bridging cortical
    veins.

-   Subacute subdural hemorrhage can be difficult to identify as it
    tends to resemble grey matter.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ![Subarachnoid hemorrhage (summary) \| Radiology Reference Article
    \| Radiopaedia.org](media/image58.jpeg){width="0.8861111111111111in"
    height="1.020138888888889in"}![Subarachnoid hemorrhage \| Radiology
    Reference Article \|
    Radiopaedia.org](media/image59.jpg){width="0.9458333333333333in"
    height="1.0291666666666666in"}

-   Subarachnoid hemorrhage (extra-axial)

-   Bleeding into subarachnoid space\
    between arachnoid and pia mater

-   Most apparent around the circle of\
    Willis or in the Sylvian fissure.

-   CT sensitivity highly dependent on\
    the amount of blood and time since\
    hemorrhage.

-   Most commonly secondary to\
    trauma or spontaneously from\
    aneurysmal rupture

-   

-   ![38 Intraventricular Hemorrhage \| Neupsy
    Key](media/image60.jpg){width="0.8916666666666667in"
    height="1.0819444444444444in"}![38 Intraventricular Hemorrhage \|
    Neupsy Key](media/image60.jpg){width="0.9430555555555555in"
    height="1.0819444444444444in"}

-   Intraventricular hemorrhage (extra-axial)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Blood within ventricular system

-   Can be primary (blood in ventricles\
    with minimal parenchymal blood)\
    or more commonly secondary\
    (secondary extension of\
    parenchymal or subarachnoid bleed\
    into ventricles)

-   Tends to pool dependently, best\
    seen in the occipital horns of the\
    lateral ventricles

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ![](media/image61.jpeg){width="0.8805555555555555in"
    height="1.007638888888889in"}![Basal ganglia hemorrhage \| Radiology
    Reference Article \|
    Radiopaedia.org](media/image62.jpeg){width="0.9430555555555555in"
    height="1.0041666666666667in"}

-   Intraparenchymal hemorrhage (intra-axial)

-   Can be spontaneous (no\
    underlying lesion -- hypertensive\
    or amyloid-related hemorrhage)\
    or due to an underlying lesion\
    (tumor, vascular malformation,\
    or cerebral venous thrombosis)

-   Traumatic intraparenchymal\
    bleeding often is ipsilateral or\
    directly contralateral to the site of\
    injury, (coup-contrecoup\
    mechanism).

-   Spontaneous bleeding related to uncontrolled hypertension
    classically occurs in the deep grey matter structures (like basal
    ganglia and thalamus).

    Cisterns

-   ![Figure 5](media/image63.png){width="3.3833333333333333in"
    height="1.2673611111111112in"}Subarachnoid or basal cisterns =
    compartments within the subarachnoid space where CSF pools between
    arachnoid and pia mater. Contains vasculature and cranial nerves.

-   Assess for hemorrhage (subarachnoid), effacement, and asymmetry

-   Multiple, with major cisterns including

-   Sylvian cisterns: between frontal and temporal lobes

-   Suprasellar cistern: above the sella turcica, under the hypothalamus

-   Quadrigeminal cistern: between the tectum, splenium of the corpus
    callosum and the superior cerebellum

-   Prepontine cistern: anterior to the pons, posterior to the clivus

-   Cisterna magna

    ![Acute CT Brain - Acute
    ischaemia](media/image64.jpeg){width="2.126388888888889in"
    height="1.2020833333333334in"}Brain

-   Gross evaluation of parenchymal structure, identification of major
    parenchymal abnormalities

-   Symmetry of bilateral sulci and gyri, sulcal effacement

-   Parenchymal attenuation

-   Acute blood, calcification, IV contrast = hyperdense.

-   Air, fat, ischemia, edema = hypodense.

-   Grey-white matter differentiation: compare to the contralateral
    side. Loss of grey-white matter differentiation is an early sign of
    ischemic insult.

-   Midline shift: evaluate the midline structures (falx cerebri, septum
    pellucidum) for mass effect

-   Edema

-   Cytotoxic edema: result of ischemia or infarction. Affects grey and
    white matter.

-   Vasogenic edema: Usually related to a lesion (tumor or abscess).
    Blood-brain barrier disrupted. Affects mainly white matter with
    preserved grey-white matter differentiation.

-   Herniation: shifts of cerebral tissue from normal location into
    adjacent space. Secondary to a change in intracranial volume and
    increase in intracranial pressure (edema, tumor, hemorrhage).

-   Masses: better assessed with intravenous contrast. Looks for
    associated hemorrhage, edema, calcification, mass effect

    Ventricles

-   Intraventricular hemorrhage (described above).

-   Be aware that dense choroid plexus calcifications may resemble acute
    intraventricular hemorrhage

-   Asymmetry

-   Hydrocephalus: important to determine if it is obstructive or
    communicating to identify the underlying cause

-   Temporal horns tend to dilate first in the setting of hydrocephalus.

-   Ventricular effacement: thinning of ventricles; can be secondary to
    cerebral edema, space occupying lesion, hemorrhage

    ![Hydrocephalus](media/image65.jpeg){width="3.6616819772528433in"
    height="1.1967475940507437in"}

    Bones

-   Important to evaluate bony structures with dedicated bone windows.

-   Fractures of the calvarium and skull base may be subtle. Use signs
    of superficial soft tissue injury as a clue for underlying
    fractures.

-   Presence of gas (pneumocephalus), blood, and opacification of
    sinuses may also hint at underlying fracture.

**Additional Resources for Head CT Interpretation:**

<https://radiopaedia.org/articles/ct-head-an-approach?lang=us>

<https://radiologyassistant.nl/neuroradiology>

https://litfl.com/ct-head-interpretation/

Consults for Radiology Procedures

-   Radiology Procedures are performed by 3 separate consult services
    depending on the procedure requested

-   These pagers are covered 24/7, often by the same person for up to a
    week at a time (home call, not night float), so kindly reserve
    overnight pages for true urgent/emergent indications and save
    non-emergent communications until the morning

+------------+------------------+-----------------+-------------------+
| Consult    | Vascular IR      | CT/US           | Fluoro/Neuro/MSK  |
| Service    |                  | Procedures      | fluoroscopy       |
+============+==================+=================+===================+
| EPIC Order | "Inpt Consult to | "Inpt Consult   | Call 20878        |
|            | Interventional   | for Adult       | (Fluoroscopy) for |
|            | Radiology"       | Image-Guided    | scheduling &      |
|            |                  | Procedures      | orders.           |
|            |                  | (CT/US)"        |                   |
+------------+------------------+-----------------+-------------------+
| Contact \# | #20840           | #20120          | #20878            |
| (weekdays) |                  |                 |                   |
|            | (MD desk)        | (MD desk)       | (Fluoro techs)    |
+------------+------------------+-----------------+-------------------+
| Contact \# | Pager only       | Pager only      | #37185            |
| (nights &  |                  |                 |                   |
| weekends)  |                  |                 | (ER reading room) |
+------------+------------------+-----------------+-------------------+
| Service    | **835-5105**     | **835-0770**    | N/A               |
| Pager      |                  |                 |                   |
+------------+------------------+-----------------+-------------------+
| Procedure  | -Active bleeding | -Abscess        | -Dobhoff tube     |
| Requested  | à Embolizations  | drainage        | placements\*\*    |
|            |                  |                 |                   |
|            | -Cholecystostomy | -Biopsies       | -Lumbar           |
|            |                  |                 | punctures\*\*     |
|            | -PTC (biliary    | -P              |                   |
|            | drains)          | aracentesis\*\* | -Joint injections |
|            |                  |                 | / aspirations     |
|            | -Nephrostomy     | -Th             |                   |
|            |                  | oracentesis\*\* | -Esophograms      |
|            | -Tunneled lines  |                 |                   |
|            |                  |                 | -Upper GI Series  |
|            | -Dialysis        |                 |                   |
|            | interventions    |                 | -Small bowel      |
|            |                  |                 | follow-through    |
|            | -G-tube          |                 |                   |
|            | placement        |                 | -Contrast enemas  |
|            |                  |                 |                   |
|            | -IVC Filter      |                 |                   |
|            |                  |                 |                   |
|            | -Drain           |                 |                   |
|            | repositioning    |                 |                   |
+------------+------------------+-----------------+-------------------+

\*\*Requires failed bedside/Inpt medicine procedures service attempt

Specific Procedural Questions

Pre-Procedure (contact consult services for case-specific requirements,
guidelines below):

-   NPO @ MN prior to procedure if sedation is to be used (majority of
    cases). Local only cases do not require pt to be NPO (see IR or
    CT/US procedures consult note for details).

-   Labs required within 1 month of procedure or sooner if there is a
    clinical situation that can affect those lab values. Think Warfarin
    and INR, for example:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   INR \<1.5 for most procedures

-   Platelets \>50K

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Anticoagulation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Google "SIR anticoagulation guidelines 2019"

-   VUMC IR guidelines based on SIR 2019 guidelines are included at end
    of section

Inpt biopsies for malignancy: Inpt biopsies are lowest priority on the
CT/US procedures service given resource availability and will more than
likely get bumped. **We recommend that these get scheduled outpt.**

-   Place an outpt consult to image guided procedures at time of
    discharge/through discharge tab in EPIC to facilitate outpt biopsies

Drain Management

-   Best to discuss directly with service that placed the drain (IR vs.
    CT/US vs. surgery)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Flush with 10 mL sterile saline q shift while inpt (flush into drain
    towards the pt and then place back to gravity or accordion suction
    bag)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If drain output decreases, either:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The collection (e.g. abscess) has been drained

-   The drain is clogged, malfunctioning, or mispositioned

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Start with making sure there are no kinks in the drain, the 3 way is
    not clogged, and that the accordion drain is functioning

-   Next, ensure the drain flushes appropriately. What this means is:
    you can flush the drain with 10 ml of saline and when you place back
    to gravity/accordion drainage bag you get back what you flushed in.
    There should be no leakage around the drain at the skin at baseline
    or during flushing

-   If the drain is functioning, and there is still no output, obtain a
    CT w/ IV contrast to evaluate the collection and ongoing need for
    drainage.

-   If the collection remains, and drain is appropriately positioned
    within the drain, it is likely clogged/malfunctioning. First ensure
    proper suction/3-way direction. If this is not the issue, you can
    consider instilling tPA into the catheter for 2 hours

    -   Would avoid in the setting of therapeutic anticoagulation given
        increased risk of bleeding unless discussed with procedural
        service.

    -   Epic order: Alteplase (TPA) injection/infusion options 🡪
        percutaneous drainage 🡪 2mg or 4mg

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If this doesn't improve output in 48 hours, consider repositioning
    drain (VIR consult)

Additional References

Labs and Anticoagulation for CT/US and Vascular IR Procedures

Based on 2019 SIR Consensus Guidelines. JVIR 2019; 1168-1184. The length
of time anticoagulation is held may differ from these guidelines in
certain clinical circumstances at the discretion of the proceduralist.
Generally, may resume anticoagulation 24 hours after the procedure. More
details about re-initiation of anticoagulation can be found in the SIR
guidelines.

**Low Risk Procedures**

-   Screening coagulation laboratory tests: PT/INR, platelet count, Hgb
    not routinely needed

-   Suggested laboratory thresholds for most pts

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   INR: correct to \<3.0

-   Platelets: transfuse if \<20,000

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Suggested laboratory thresholds in pts with chronic liver disease

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   INR: n/a

-   Platelets: transfuse if \<20,000

-   Fibrinogen: cryoprecipitate if \<100

+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
| List of Low-Risk         | Medication          | Action              |
| Procedures               |                     |                     |
+==========================+=====================+=====================+
| **Vascular**             | **Anticoagulants**  |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Central venous        |                     |                     |
| catheter                 |                     |                     |
| non-tunneled/tunneled    |                     |                     |
| line placement, removal  |                     |                     |
| and exchanges (e.g.      |                     |                     |
| port)                    |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Dialysis assess       |                     |                     |
| interventions (e.g.      |                     |                     |
| shuntograms)             |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Gonadal vein          |                     |                     |
| embolization             |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- IVC filter placement  |                     |                     |
| and retrieval            |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Laser ablation and    |                     |                     |
| phlebectomy              |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Lymphangiogram        |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Sclerotherapy for     |                     |                     |
| venous malformation      |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Transjugular liver    |                     |                     |
| biopsy                   |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Venography and select |                     |                     |
| venous interventions     |                     |                     |
| (e.g. adrenal vein       |                     |                     |
| sampling)                |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| **Nonvascular**          |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Superficial abscess   |                     |                     |
| drainage                 |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Catheter exchanges    |                     |                     |
| (e.g. biliary,           |                     |                     |
| nephrostomy, abscess)    |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- FNA/superficial       |                     |                     |
| biopsy                   |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Gastrostomy and GJ    |                     |                     |
| exchanges                |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Appendicular skeleton |                     |                     |
| bone biopsy, joint       |                     |                     |
| injections, peripheral   |                     |                     |
| nerve blocks             |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Thoracentesis         |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Paracentesis          |                     |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
| \- Tunneled drainage     |                     |                     |
| catheter placement       |                     |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Warfarin (Coumadin) | Target INR \<3.0.   |
|                          |                     | Withhold 5 days for |
|                          |                     | MSK procedures      |
|                          |                     | only. Bridging per  |
|                          |                     | PCP/cardiology      |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Heparin             | Do not withhold     |
|                          | (unfractionated)    |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | LMWH (therapeutic)  | Do not withhold     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | LMWH (prophylactic) | Do not withhold     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Rivaroxaban         | Do not withhold     |
|                          | (Xarelto)           |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Edoxaban (Savaysa)  | Do not withhold     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Fundaparinux        | Do not withhold     |
|                          | (Arixtra)           |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Apixaban (Eliquis)  | Do not withhold     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Argatroban          | Do not withhold     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Bivalirudin         | Do not withhold     |
|                          | (Angiomax)          |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Dabigatran          | Do not withhold     |
|                          | (Pradaxa)           |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | **Antiplatelets**   |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Aspirin (81 or 325  | Do not withhold     |
|                          | mg)                 |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Clopidogrel         | Do not withhold     |
|                          | (Plavix)            |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Prasugrel (Effient) | Do not withhold     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Ticagrelor          | Do not withhold     |
|                          | (Brilinta)          |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Cangrelor           | Do not withhold     |
|                          | (Kengreal)          |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | **NSAIDs**          |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Short-acting        | Do not withhold     |
|                          |                     |                     |
|                          | \- Ibuprofen        |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
|                          | \- Diclofenac       |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
|                          | \- Ketoprofen       |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
|                          | \- Indomethacin     |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Intermediate-acting | Do not withhold     |
|                          |                     |                     |
|                          | \- Ibuprofen        |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
|                          | \- Diclofenac       |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
|                          | \- Ketoprofen       |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
|                          | \- Indomethacin     |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Long-acting         | Do not withhold     |
|                          |                     |                     |
|                          | -Meloxicam          |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | **Glycoprotein      |                     |
|                          | IIb/IIIa            |                     |
|                          | Inhibitors**        |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Long-acting         | Withhold 24 hours   |
|                          |                     |                     |
|                          | \- Abciximab        |                     |
|                          | (ReoPro)            |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Short-acting        | Withhold 4 hours    |
|                          |                     |                     |
|                          | \- Eptifibatide     |                     |
|                          | (Integrilin)        |                     |
|                          |                     |                     |
|                          | \- Tirofiban        |                     |
|                          | (Aggrastat)         |                     |
+--------------------------+---------------------+---------------------+

**High Risk Procedures**

-   Screening coagulation laboratory tests: PT/INR, platelet count, Hgb

-   Suggested laboratory thresholds for most pts

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   INR: correct to \<1.8 (\<1.5 if neuro procedure)

-   Platelets: transfuse if \<50,000

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Suggested laboratory thresholds in pts with chronic liver disease

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   INR: \<2.5. (\<1.5 if neuro procedure)

-   Platelets: transfuse if \<30,000

-   Fibrinogen: cryoprecipitate if \<100

+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
| List of High-Risk        | Medication         | Action              |
| Procedures               |                    |                     |
+==========================+====================+=====================+
| **Vascular**             | **Anticoagulants** |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Angiography and       |                    |                     |
| arterial interventions   |                    |                     |
| (e.g. chemoembolization, |                    |                     |
| renal embolization,      |                    |                     |
| uterine embolization)    |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- BRTO/BATO             |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Catheter directed     |                    |                     |
| thrombolysis (e.g. DVT,  |                    |                     |
| PE, portal vein)         |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Complex IVC filter    |                    |                     |
| removal                  |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Lymphangiogram with   |                    |                     |
| thoracic duct            |                    |                     |
| embolization             |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Portal vein           |                    |                     |
| interventions            |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Pulmonary artery      |                    |                     |
| malformation             |                    |                     |
| embolization             |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Transjugular          |                    |                     |
| intrahepatic             |                    |                     |
| portosystemic shunt      |                    |                     |
| (TIPS)                   |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| **Nonvascular**          |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Ablations (e.g.       |                    |                     |
| cryoablation, microwave  |                    |                     |
| ablation, radiofrequency |                    |                     |
| ablation)                |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Deep abscess drainage |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Biliary interventions |                    |                     |
| (new placement e.g.      |                    |                     |
| cholecystostomy)         |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Deep non-organ biopsy |                    |                     |
| (e.g. retroperitoneal,   |                    |                     |
| pelvic, intra-abdominal) |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- New Gastrostomy and   |                    |                     |
| GJ tube placement        |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Axial skeleton        |                    |                     |
| biopsy, bone marrow      |                    |                     |
| biopsy                   |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Neuro: epidural       |                    |                     |
| injection, facet block,  |                    |                     |
| LP, myelogram, vertebral |                    |                     |
| biopsy                   |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Solid organ biopsy    |                    |                     |
| (e.g. liver, kidney,     |                    |                     |
| lung)                    |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Spine procedures      |                    |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
| \- Urinary tract         |                    |                     |
| interventions            |                    |                     |
| (nephrostomy tube        |                    |                     |
| placement, ureteral      |                    |                     |
| dilation)                |                    |                     |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Warfarin           | Withhold 5 days,    |
|                          | (Coumadin)         | goal INR \<1.8.     |
|                          |                    | Bridging per        |
|                          |                    | PCP/cardiology      |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Heparin            | Withhold IV for 4   |
|                          | (unfractionated)   | hours               |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          |                    | Withhold SQ for 6   |
|                          |                    | hours               |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | LMWH (therapeutic) | Withhold for 24     |
|                          |                    | hours               |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | LMWH               | Withhold for 12     |
|                          | (prophylactic)     | hours               |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Rivaroxaban        | Withhold:           |
|                          | (Xarelto)          |                     |
|                          |                    | 2 days (CrCl\>30)   |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          |                    | 3 days (CrCl\<30)   |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Edoxaban (Savaysa) | Withhold 2 days     |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Fundaparinux       | Withhold:           |
|                          | (Arixtra)          |                     |
|                          |                    | 2 days (CrCl\>50)   |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          |                    | 3 days (CrCl\<50)   |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Apixaban (Eliquis) | Withhold:           |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          |                    | 2 days (CrCl\>50)   |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          |                    | 3 days (CrCl\<50)   |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Argatroban         | Withhold for 2      |
|                          |                    | hours               |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Bivalirudin        | Withhold for 2      |
|                          | (Angiomax)         | hours               |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Dabigatran         | Withhold:           |
|                          | (Pradaxa)          |                     |
|                          |                    | 2 days (CrCl\>50)   |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          |                    | 3 days (CrCl\<50)   |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | **Antiplatelets**  |                     |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Aspirin (81 or 325 | 81mg: Do not        |
|                          | mg)                | withhold            |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          |                    | 325mg: Withhold 5   |
|                          |                    | days unless         |
|                          |                    | angiography or      |
|                          |                    | neuro procedure     |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Clopidogrel        | Withhold 5 days     |
|                          | (Plavix)           | unless              |
|                          |                    | angio               |
|                          |                    | graphy/embolization |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Prasugrel          | Withhold 7 days     |
|                          | (Effient)          |                     |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Ticagrelor         | Withhold 5 days     |
|                          | (Brilinta)         |                     |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Cangrelor          | Avoid; if emergent  |
|                          | (Kengreal)         | withhold 1 hour     |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | **NSAIDs**         |                     |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Short-acting       | No recommendation   |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          | \- Ibuprofen       |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          | \- Diclofenac      |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          | \- Ketoprofen      |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          | \- Indomethacin    |                     |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | I                  | No recommendation   |
|                          | ntermediate-acting |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          | \- Ibuprofen       |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          | \- Diclofenac      |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          | \- Ketoprofen      |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          | \- Indomethacin    |                     |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Long-acting        | No recommendation   |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          | -Meloxicam         |                     |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | **Glycoprotein     |                     |
|                          | IIb/IIIa           |                     |
|                          | Inhibitors**       |                     |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Long-acting        | Withhold 24 hours   |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          | \- Abciximab       |                     |
|                          | (ReoPro)           |                     |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+
|                          | Short-acting       | Withhold 4 hours    |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          | \- Eptifibatide    |                     |
|                          | (Integrilin)       |                     |
|                          |                    |                     |
|                          | \- Tirofiban       |                     |
|                          | (Aggrastat)        |                     |
+--------------------------+--------------------+---------------------+

Contrast Allergies or Extravasation

See ACR contrast manual for additional Information
(<https://www.acr.org/Clinical-Resources/> Contrast-Manual)

Examples of premedication regimens

-   Methylprednisolone 32mg PO 12, 2 hrs prior ± Benadryl 50mg PO 1 hr
    prior OR

-   Prednisone 50mg PO 13, 7, 1 hr prior ± Benadryl 50mg PO 1 hr prior
    OR

-   Hydrocortisone 200mg IV 5 hrs and 1 hr and Benadryl 50mg IV 1 hr
    prior

Regimen by problem

-   Hives/diffuse erythema: Can observe

    -   If associated with hypotension or respiratory distress,
        considered anaphylaxis. Treat with IVF, epinephrine, and
        supplemental O2

    -   If only skin findings but severe and/or progressive, can give
        Benadryl 50mg PO, IV or IM

-   Laryngeal edema (inspiratory stridor): epinephrine

-   Bronchospasm: beta-2 agonist inhaler 2 puffs x3, epinephrine if not
    responsive or severe

-   Hypotension with tachycardia: IVF, epinephrine, supplemental O2

-   Hypotension with bradycardia: IVF, atropine if refractory,
    supplemental O2

-   Contrast extravasation: elevate arm (heart level), cool compress,
    remove rings; consider surgical consultation for decreased
    perfusion, sensation, strength, active ROM, or increasing pain

Rheumatology

Editor: Tina Arkee, MD and Lale Ertuglu, MD

Reviewed by Tyler Reese, MD

Approach to Joint Pain -- Tina Arkee

Background

-   MSK complaints account for \>20% of all outpatient visits in the US

-   The goal is to formulate a ddx based on good history taking and
    thorough physical exam that leads to accurate diagnosis and timely
    therapy while avoiding excessive diagnostic testing and unnecessary
    treatment

    History

-   Articular (within the joint) vs. extra-articular (involving myscles,
    tendons, bursae, bones)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Articular: pain with passive and active ROM, swelling, crepitus,
    joint instability, joint deformity

-   Extra-articular: pain with active ROM only, may have focal
    tenderness near the joint, typically no crepitus, instability, or
    deformity

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Chronology

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute: \< 6 weeks

-   Chronic: \>12 weeks

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Inflammatory vs. noninflammatory

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Inflammatory: swelling, warmth, erythema, worse with rest, morning
    stiffness \> 30 min - 1 hr

-   Noninflammatory: worse with activity, morning stiffness \< 30 min -
    1 hr

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Localized (monoarticular) vs diffuse (oligo/polyarticular)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Monoarticular: 1 joint

-   Oligoarticular: 2-4 joints

-   Polyarticular: \>4 joints

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Symmetric vs asymmetric

-   Size of joints involved (small vs large)

-   Presence of signs and symptoms of systemic inflammation

    Physical exam

-   Visually inspect the affected joint. Inflamed joints may look red,
    swollen, or deformed.

-   Palpate the joint for warmth, effusion, focal tenderness
    (inflammatory) or bony enlargement (non-inflammatory)

-   Perform passive and active ROM exam. Articular joint pain is
    elicited by passive and active ROM, and may also have crepitus.
    Extra-articular joint pain is only elicited by active ROM.

-   Look for signs of systemic inflammation, including rashes, mucosal
    ulcers, hair and nail changes.

-   For polyarticular complaints, the goal is to determine inflammatory
    vs non-inflammatory

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Inflammatory: joint swelling, warmth, visible deformities. More
    common in MCP and wrist

-   Non-inflammatory: bony enlargement, Heberden's nodes (DIP),
    Bouchard's nodes (PIP), CMC squaring, prominence of the medial
    tibial plateau, absence of joint effusions (except the knees with
    severe OA). More common in DIP and weight bearing joints.

    Lab investigations:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CBC w/diff, ESR, CRP

-   Synovial fluid analysis if there is a joint effusion

-   Disease specific serologies as indicated

    Diagnostic imaging

-   X-ray: may be normal in early disease; can be used to monitor
    disease progression

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Inflammatory arthritis: early on, may see soft tissue swelling and
    periarticular demineralization; later in disease, may see erosions,
    uniform joint space narrowing, and joint subluxation

-   Non-inflammatory arthritis (i.e. osteoarthritis): non-uniform joint
    space narrowing, osteophytes, subchondral sclerosis, subchondral
    cysts

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ultrasound: Useful for detecting synovial hypertrophy, tissue
    vascularity (use doppler), and visualization of joint effusions and
    tendons to guide arthrocentesis

-   MRI: more sensitive than xray and MRI, but not necessarily more
    specific

    Synovial fluid aspiration and analysis: see "Arthrocentesis Quick
    Look" section

    ![](media/image66.png){width="3.646763998250219in"
    height="2.2111111111111112in"}

Arthrocentesis Quick Look -- Tina Arkee

Indications for arthrocentesis:

-   Monoarthritis (acute or chronic)

-   Suspicion for infection, crystal arthropathy, or hemarthrosis

-   Trauma with joint effusion

-   When diagnosis is unclear despite history and other workup

Relative Contraindications to arthrocentesis

-   Extensive cellulitis or psoriatic plaque around the site of interest
    (risk of introducing bacteria into a sterile space)

-   Coagulopathy

-   Bacteremia

-   Concern for infection of a prosthetic joint -- these should only be
    tapped by Ortho!

What to order

-   Synovial fluid exam (includes cell count and crystal exam). \*Note:
    may see similar cell counts in gout and septic arthritis. The
    presence of crystals does not necessarily rule out septic arthritis.

-   Body fluid gram stain and culture

**[Synovial fluid analysis]{.underline}**

+--------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+-----------+
|        | **Non-inf   | **Inflammatory**  | **Septic**  | **Hemo    |
|        | lammatory** |                   |             | rrhagic** |
+========+=============+===================+=============+===========+
| **     | Clear       | Clear to cloudy   | Op          | Reddish   |
| Appear | s           |                   | aque/turbid | brown     |
| ance** | traw/yellow | yellow            | yellow      |           |
|        |             |                   | green       |           |
+--------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+-----------+
| **Cell | \<2000      | \>2000--50,000    | \>50,000    | \<2000    |
| c      |             |                   |             |           |
| ount** |             |                   |             |           |
+--------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+-----------+
| **% of | \<25%       | \>50%             | \>75%       | \<50%     |
| PMNs** |             |                   |             |           |
+--------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+-----------+
| **Cul  | Negative    | Negative          | Positive    | Negative  |
| ture** |             |                   |             |           |
+--------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+-----------+
| **Crys | No          | Yes               | No          | No        |
| tals** |             |                   |             |           |
|        |             | *Gout:* needle    |             |           |
|        |             | shaped,           |             |           |
|        |             | negatively        |             |           |
|        |             | birefringent      |             |           |
|        |             |                   |             |           |
|        |             | *Pseudogout:*     |             |           |
|        |             | rhomboid shaped,  |             |           |
|        |             | positively        |             |           |
|        |             | birefringent      |             |           |
+--------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+-----------+
| *      | Oste        | Inflammatory      | Septic      | Trauma,   |
| *DDx** | oarthritis, | arthritis,        | arthritis   | coa       |
|        | trauma,     | crystal           |             | gulopathy |
|        | os          | arthritis,        |             |           |
|        | teonecrosis | sarcoidosis,      |             |           |
|        |             | indolent          |             |           |
|        |             | infections        |             |           |
+--------+-------------+-------------------+-------------+-----------+

Crystals

-   Monosodium urate: needle-shaped, negatively birefringent

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sensitivity is generally good (\>90s%)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate: rhomboid-shaped, positively
    birefringent (weakly), ane appear blue when parallel to the
    polarizer

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Weak birefringence significantly reduces sensitivity

Biologic Overview -- Sara Treat

Background

-   \"-cept\" refers to fusion of a receptor to the Fc part of human
    immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1)

-   \"-mab\" indicates a monoclonal antibody (mAb)

-   \"-ximab\" indicates a chimeric mAb

-   \"-zumab\" indicates a humanized mAb

-   \"-umab\" indicates a fully human mAb

-   "-tinib" indicates a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (small molecule
    inhibitors, not true biologics)

    B-cell depletion and inhibition

+-----------+----------------+------------------+--------------------+
| Generic   | Mechanism of   | Common Uses      | Common Side        |
| Name      | Action         |                  | Effects            |
|           |                |                  |                    |
| (Brand    |                |                  |                    |
| Name)     |                |                  |                    |
+===========+================+==================+====================+
| Belimumab | IgG1-lambda    | lupus nephritis, | GI symptoms,       |
|           | mAb that       | SLE              | hypersensitivity   |
| (         | prevents       |                  | reaction,          |
| Benlysta) | survival of    |                  | infections,        |
|           | B-lymphocytes  |                  | psychiatric        |
|           | by blocking    |                  | disturbances       |
|           | the binding of |                  |                    |
|           | soluble human  |                  |                    |
|           | B lymphocyte   |                  |                    |
|           | stimulator     |                  |                    |
|           | protein (BLyS) |                  |                    |
|           | to receptors   |                  |                    |
|           | on B           |                  |                    |
|           | lymphocytes    |                  |                    |
+-----------+----------------+------------------+--------------------+
| Rituximab | mAb against    | CLL, Non-Hodgkin | Hypo               |
|           | CD20 antigen   | lymphomas, GPA,  | gammaglobulinemia, |
| (Rituxan) | on surface of  | microscopic      | (may be            |
|           | B-cells; B     | polyangiitis,    | persistent),       |
|           | cell depletion | pemphigus        | infusion reaction, |
|           | via            | vulgaris, RA;    | HTN, peripheral    |
|           | ab-dependent   | many off-label   | edema, night       |
|           | cell mediated  | uses (GvHD,      | sweats, fever,     |
|           | cytotoxicity   | lupus nephritis, | weight gain,       |
|           | function of NK | MG,              | angioedema,        |
|           | cells          | neuromyelitis    | arthralgias, ⇑     |
|           |                | optica)          | ALT,               |
|           |                |                  | hypophosphatemia,  |
|           |                |                  | hematologic        |
|           |                |                  | abnormalities      |
+-----------+----------------+------------------+--------------------+

Complement-inhibition

+-----------+---------------------+--------------+--------------------+
| Generic   | Mechanism of Action | Common Uses  | Common Side        |
| Name      |                     |              | Effects            |
|           |                     |              |                    |
| (Brand    |                     |              |                    |
| Name)     |                     |              |                    |
+===========+=====================+==============+====================+
| Avacopan  | Complement 5a       | ANCA         | HTN, HA, rash, GI  |
|           | receptor antagonist | vasculitis   | upset/ diarrhea,   |
| (Tavneos) |                     |              | hepatoxicity       |
+-----------+---------------------+--------------+--------------------+

Costimulation blockade

+-----------+------------------------+--------+----------------------+
| Generic   | Mechanism of Action    | Common | Common Side Effects  |
| Name      |                        | Uses   |                      |
|           |                        |        |                      |
| (Brand    |                        |        |                      |
| Name)     |                        |        |                      |
+===========+========================+========+======================+
| Abatacep  | inhibits T-cell        | RA,    | nausea, UTI, HA,     |
|           | activation by binding  | psor   | URI, Ab development  |
| (Orencia) | CD80 and CD86 on APCs, | iasis, |                      |
|           | thus blocking the      | JIA    |                      |
|           | required CD28 ixn      |        |                      |
|           | between APCs and T     |        |                      |
|           | cells.                 |        |                      |
+-----------+------------------------+--------+----------------------+

IL-1 inhibition

+------------+------------+--------------------+----------------------+
| Generic    | Mechanism  | Common Uses        | Common Side Effects  |
| Name       | of Action  |                    |                      |
|            |            |                    |                      |
| (Brand     |            |                    |                      |
| Name)      |            |                    |                      |
+============+============+====================+======================+
| Anakinra   | IL-1       | IL-1 receptor      | HA, vomiting,        |
|            | receptor   | antagonist         | infections,          |
| (Kineret)  | antagonist | deficiency, gout   | nasopharyngitis, Ab  |
|            |            | flares, FMF, HLH   | development; in RA:  |
|            |            |                    | eosinophilia,        |
|            |            |                    | decreased WBC        |
+------------+------------+--------------------+----------------------+
| C          | mAb        | Adult onset        | weight gain, GI sx,  |
| anakinumab | against    | Still's disease,   | HA, vertigo, serious |
|            | IL-1β      | Cr                 | infections           |
| (Ilaris)   |            | yoporin-associated |                      |
|            |            | periodic syndromes |                      |
|            |            | (CAPS), FMF,       |                      |
|            |            | hyperimmunoglobin  |                      |
|            |            | D syndrome, TRAPS; |                      |
|            |            | off-label: gout    |                      |
|            |            | flare              |                      |
+------------+------------+--------------------+----------------------+
| Rilonacept | IL- β      | Cr                 | Ab development,      |
|            | soluble    | yoporin-associated | infection (including |
| (Arcalyst) | decoy      | periodic syndrome, | serious infection),  |
|            | receptor   | deficiency IL-1    | local site reaction, |
|            |            | receptor           | URI                  |
|            |            | antagonist,        |                      |
|            |            | pericarditis       |                      |
+------------+------------+--------------------+----------------------+

IL-5 inhibition

+------------+--------------+--------------------------+--------------+
| Generic    | Mechanism of | Common Uses              | Common Side  |
| Name       | Action       |                          | Effects      |
|            |              |                          |              |
| (Brand     |              |                          |              |
| Name)      |              |                          |              |
+============+==============+==========================+==============+
| M          | mAb against  | Eosinophilic asthma,     | local        |
| epolizumab | IL-5, direct | EGPA, hypereosinophilic  | injection    |
| (Nucala)   | IL-5         | syndromes,               | site         |
|            | antagonist   | rhinosinusitis with      | reaction, HA |
|            |              | nasal polyps             |              |
+------------+--------------+--------------------------+--------------+

IL-6 inhibition

+-----------+----------------+--------------------+-------------------+
| Generic   | Mechanism of   | Common Uses        | Common Side       |
| Name      | Action         |                    | Effects           |
|           |                |                    |                   |
| (Brand    |                |                    |                   |
| Name)     |                |                    |                   |
+===========+================+====================+===================+
| To        | IL-6 receptor  | GCA, RA, JIA,      | ⇑ serum           |
| cilizumab | antagonist     | neuromyelitis      | cholesterol, ⇑    |
|           |                | optica, systemic   | AST/ALT, infusion |
| (Actemra) |                | sclerosis, ILD,    | rxn, HSV          |
|           |                | cytokine release   | infection (\<2%)  |
|           |                | syndrome for CAR T |                   |
|           |                | cells              |                   |
+-----------+----------------+--------------------+-------------------+
| Sarilumab | IL-6 receptor  | RA                 | ⇑ AST/ALT, HSV    |
|           | antagonist     |                    | infection (\<2%)  |
| (Kevzara) | (soluble +     |                    |                   |
|           | m              |                    |                   |
|           | embrane-bound) |                    |                   |
+-----------+----------------+--------------------+-------------------+

IL-12/23 inhibition

+------------+--------------+-----------------+----------------------+
| Generic    | Mechanism of | Common Uses     | Common Side Effects  |
| Name       | Action       |                 |                      |
|            |              |                 |                      |
| (Brand     |              |                 |                      |
| Name)      |              |                 |                      |
+============+==============+=================+======================+
| Guselkumab | human IgG1   | psoriasis       | URI, tinea, GI sx    |
|            | mAb against  |                 |                      |
| (Tremfya)  | IL-23        |                 |                      |
+------------+--------------+-----------------+----------------------+
| Ri         | mAb against  | IBD, psoriasis, | nausea, UTI, HA,     |
| sankizumab | IL-23 via    | JIA             | URI, Ab development  |
|            | p19          |                 |                      |
| (Skyrizi)  |              |                 |                      |
+------------+--------------+-----------------+----------------------+
| U          | mAb against  | IBD, psoriasis  | nasopharyngitis, Ab  |
| stekinumab | IL-12 +      |                 | development, acne    |
|            | IL-23        |                 | vulgaris, GI sx, GU  |
| (Stelara)  |              |                 | sx                   |
+------------+--------------+-----------------+----------------------+

IL-17 inhibition

+-------------+----------------+----------+---------------------------+
| Generic     | Mechanism of   | Common   | Common Side Effects       |
| Name        | Action         | Uses     |                           |
|             |                |          |                           |
| (Brand      |                |          |                           |
| Name)       |                |          |                           |
+=============+================+==========+===========================+
| Brodalumab  | human IgG1 mAb | P        | infection, tinea, GI,     |
|             | against IL-17A | soriasis | suicidal ideation and     |
| (Siliq)     |                |          | behavior (REMS program)   |
+-------------+----------------+----------+---------------------------+
| Ixekizumab  | human IgG4 mAb | AS,      | infection, tinea,         |
|             | against IL-17A | p        | neutropenia, Ab           |
| (Taltz)     |                | soriasis | development, URI, Crohn's |
|             |                |          | (\<1%)                    |
+-------------+----------------+----------+---------------------------+
| Secukinumab | human IgG1 mAb | AS,      | nasopharyngitis, GI, IBD  |
|             | against IL-17A | p        | (\<1%)                    |
| (Cosentyx)  |                | soriasis |                           |
+-------------+----------------+----------+---------------------------+

Kinase inhibition: BLACK BOX warning for mortality, increased
malignancies, thrombosis (DVT and PE), and increased cardiovascular
events. Data is from tofacitinib, but warning is applied to all JAK
inhibitors.

+------------+-------------+------------------+-----------------------+
| Generic    | Mechanism   | Common Uses      | Common Side Effects   |
| Name       | of Action   |                  |                       |
|            |             |                  |                       |
| (Brand     |             |                  |                       |
| Name)      |             |                  |                       |
+============+=============+==================+=======================+
| A          | JAK-1       | Atopic           | nausea, infections,   |
| brocitinib | inhibitor   | dermatitis       | nasopharyngitis       |
|            |             |                  |                       |
| (Cibinqo)  |             |                  |                       |
+------------+-------------+------------------+-----------------------+
| B          | JAK-1 and   | RA, alopecia     | URI, nausea,          |
| aracitinib | JAK-2       | areata,          | ⇑AST/ALT; \<1%        |
|            | inhibitor   | off-label:       | lymphoma              |
| (Olumiant) |             | COVID-19         |                       |
+------------+-------------+------------------+-----------------------+
| R          | JAK-1 and   | Topical: atopic  | HTN, HLD, GI upset, ⇑ |
| uxolitinib | JAK-2       | dermatitis and   | LFTs, anemia,         |
|            | inhibitor   | vitiligo         | infection, dizziness, |
| (Jakafi)   |             |                  | muscle spasm, fever   |
|            |             | Oral: GvHD,      |                       |
|            |             | polycythemia     |                       |
|            |             | vera,            |                       |
|            |             | myelofibrosis    |                       |
+------------+-------------+------------------+-----------------------+
| T          | JAK-1 and   | RA, UC, JIA,     | nasopharyngitis, skin |
| ofacitinib | JAK-3       | psoriatic        | rash, GI sx, GU sx;   |
|            | inhibitor   | arthritis        | \<1% lymphoma         |
| (Xeljanz)  |             |                  |                       |
+------------+-------------+------------------+-----------------------+
| Up         | N           | RA               | URI, nausea,          |
| adacitinib | on-specific |                  | neutropenia, ⇑AST,    |
|            | JAK         |                  | ⇑CPK                  |
| (Rinvoq)   | inhibitor   |                  |                       |
+------------+-------------+------------------+-----------------------+

TNF-inhibition

+-----------+---------------------+--------------+--------------------+
| Generic   | Mechanism of Action | Common Uses  | Common Side        |
| Name      |                     |              | Effects            |
|           |                     |              |                    |
| (Brand    |                     |              |                    |
| Name)     |                     |              |                    |
+===========+=====================+==============+====================+
| A         | mAb against TNFα    | RA, IBD, AS, | infection (esp     |
| dalilumab |                     | psoriasis,   | mycobacterial and  |
|           |                     | uveitis,     | fungal), drug      |
| (Humira)  |                     | hidradenitis | induced lupus,     |
|           |                     | suppurativa  | skin rash, HA,     |
|           |                     |              | URI, ⇑ CPK, +ANA   |
|           |                     |              | titer (12%), Ab    |
|           |                     |              | development        |
|           |                     |              | (3-26%)            |
+-----------+---------------------+--------------+--------------------+
| Cer       | humanized mAb Fab   | RA, Crohn's, | skin rash, nausea, |
| tolizumab | fragment against    | AS,          | URI                |
|           | TNFα                | psoriasis;   |                    |
| (Cimzia)  |                     | \*approved   |                    |
|           |                     | for          |                    |
|           |                     | pregnancy    |                    |
+-----------+---------------------+--------------+--------------------+
| E         | TNF receptor linked | RA, AS,      | skin rash,         |
| tanercept | to Fc portion of    | psoriasis,   | diarrhea,          |
|           | IgG1 binds TNF      | JIA          |                    |
| (Enbrel)  |                     |              | +ANA titer (11%)   |
+-----------+---------------------+--------------+--------------------+
| Golimumab | mAb against TNFα    | RA, UC, AS,  | URI, Ab            |
|           |                     | psoriasis,   | development        |
| (Simponi) |                     | JIA          | (16-38%), +ANA     |
|           |                     |              | titer (4-17%)      |
+-----------+---------------------+--------------+--------------------+
| I         | chimeric mAb        | RA, IBD, AS, | abd pain, URI sx,  |
| nfliximab | against TNFα        | psoriasis    | anemia, ⇑ ALT, Ab  |
|           |                     |              | development        |
| (         |                     |              | (10-50%)           |
| Remicade) |                     |              |                    |
+-----------+---------------------+--------------+--------------------+

Rheumatology Lab Testing -- Raeann Whitney

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Lab Test            Quick Associations        Additional Facts
  ------------------- ------------------------- ----------------------------
  ANA                 SLE, many others (NOT     
                      specific)                 

  dsDNA               SLE                       high level (\>150) usually
                                                specific for SLE, correlate
                                                with disease activity,
                                                associated with renal
                                                disease

  Anti-Smith          SLE                       specific for SLE but not
                                                sensitive

  Anti-SSA / Ro       Sjogrens (fetal heart     Maternal positivity for SSA
                      block); also seen in SLE, is associated with
                      MCTD, myositis            congenital heart block in
                                                infants.

  Anti-SSB / La       Sjogrens                  specific for systemic
                                                sclerosis, most associated
                                                with diffuse cutaneous
                                                disease

  Anti-RNP            Mixed connective tissue   can be positive in SLE
                      disease                   

  Anti-Scl70          Scleroderma (diffuse)     

  Anti-centromere\*   Scleroderma (limited)     associated with pulmonary
                                                HTN

  Anti-Jo             Dermatomyositis           

  Anti-histone        Drug-induced lupus        

  RF                  RA (not specific; also    
                      HBV/HCV,                  
                      cryoglobulinemia, etc.)   

  Anti-CCP            RA                        

  C3/C4               SLE (hypocomplementemia)  

  ANCA                Granulomatosis with       
                      polyangiitis, microscopic 
                      polyangiitis              
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

\*At VUMC, the ANA may show a centromere pattern but does not reflex to
anti-centromere Ab testing. The specific Ab should be sent to confirm if
the pattern states centromere

Serologic testing must be interpreted in the clinical context. ANA,
ANCA, and even specific antibodies without typical manifestations of the
disease are of unclear clinical significance

Anti-nuclear Antibodies (ANA)

-   Always send with reflex (if ≥ 1:80, will check for dsDNA, Sm, SSA,
    SSB, Scl70, RNP)

-   At VUMC, 1:80 is considered "positive"; a higher titer is more
    specific for ANA-associated rheumatologic disease

-   \~30% of the general population has a "positive" ANA at 1:40, most
    clinically significant ANAs are at least 1:160

-   Common patterns

-   Smooth/homogenous: associated with anti-dsDNA and anti-histone
    antibodies

-   Speckled: associated with anti-RNP, anti-Smith, anti-SSA/Ro,
    anti-SSB/La

-   Nucleolar: associated with anti-Scl-70; notably many other
    scleroderma and overlab Ab produce a nucleolar patter but are not
    included on reflex such as anti-RNA-polymerase 3, anti-PM/SCL, and
    anti-U3-RNP

Anti-neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibodies (ANCA)

-   Qualitative: p-ANCA, c-ANCA, negative, or indeterminate

-   Quantitative titers: anti-proteinase 3 (PR3), anti-myeloperoxidase
    (MPO) IgG antibodies

C3 and C4

-   Hypocomplementemia in active SLE (due to increased consumption)

-   Complement may also be low in diseases that decreases the liver's
    synthetic function

-   ↓ C3/C4 in other diseases that form immune complexes or activates
    the classic complement pathway: mixed cryoglobulinemia, Sjogren's,
    MPGN, and antiphospholipid syndrome

C-reactive Protein (CRP) and Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR)

-   Both tests are non-specific markers of inflammation

-   CRP measures a specific acute phase protein made by the liver

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   IL-6 dependent (pts on anti-IL6 therapy will have falsely decreased
    CRP)

-   Typically changes more rapidly (24h) than ESR (7-14d)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ESR is the rate at which RBCs settle to the bottom of a test tube

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Presence of positively charged proteins disrupt the self-repelling
    negative charges of RBCs🡪 clumping (rouleaux formation)🡪 increased
    rate of sedimentation

-   ESR will increase in states with increased antibodies, acute phase
    proteins,

-   Falsely high ESR: sickle cell (microcytosis and anemia leads to
    fewer and smaller cells that can therefore fall fast)

-   Falsely low ESR: low fibrinogen states (DIC, HLH), polycythemia

Creatinine Kinase (CK)

-   CK can be elevated by vigorous exercise, rhabdomyolysis,
    endocrinopathy, cardiac disease, renal disease, malignancy,
    medication effect, neuromuscular disease, connective tissue disease

-   Consider inflammatory myopathies if there is ↑ CK and objective
    proximal muscle weakness

-   CK is normal in polymyalgia rheumatica

Extended Myositis Panel

-   Ordered as "Myositis extended Pnl-ARUP"; includes 19 separate Abs

-   Can be sent when suspecting various forms of myositis such as
    dermatomyositis, polymyositis, anti-synthetase syndrome (e.g. ILD
    work-up)

Cryoglobulins

-   Cryoglobulins are immunoglobulins that spontaneously precipitate at
    low temperatures and become soluble again with rewarming

-   Reported as qualitative (positive or negative) and quantitative
    (percentage = "cryocrit")

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cryoglobulin last test is highly prone to collection error; must be
    collected in pre-warmed tubes and maintained at body temperature
    during collection and delivery to the lab;

-   At VUMC can only be obtained at certain times M-F; lab and nursing
    staff can coordinate

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cryoglobulins are classified into three types: Type I, II, and III

-   Type I cryoglobulins: monoclonal immunoglobulin (IgM or IgG)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lymphoproliferative disorders: Waldenström's, MM, CLL, B cell
    lymphomas

-   Types II and III are mixed cryoglobulins (they contain polyclonal
    components)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Essentially all mixed cryoglobulinemias will be RF+ \*

-   Commonly associated with HCV (\~90%); also CTD

-   Type II: monoclonal Ig with RF activity against polyclonal Igs

-   Type III: polyclonal Ig with RF against polyclonal Igs

    \*RF activity by definition is the reactivity of an IgM component
    with the Fc portion of an IgG

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis: small vessel vasculitis resulting from
    vascular deposition of cryoprecipitates (immune complexes)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Skin most common: palpable purpura, usually in lower extremities
    (colder areas), immune-complex mediated leukocytoclastic vasculitis
    on biopsy

-   Additional manifestations: arthralgias, peripheral motor or sensory
    neuropathy, sicca, glomerulonephritis (usually MPGN)

-   Treatment: B cell depletion (rituximab) and treatment of underlying
    cause (e.g. Hep C)

Ankylosing Spondylitis -- Krissie Lobon

Background and Classification

-   Spondyloarthritis: designates a group of diseases classified as
    either axial or peripheral

-   Historically associated with a family of arthridities: ankylosing
    spondylitis, reactive arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, peripheral
    arthritis, uveitis, IBD, and presence of HLA-B27 gene

-   HLA-B27 is strongly linked to disease susceptibility; however, AS
    can occur in absence of the gene and only \~3% of HLA-B27 positive
    subjects develop AS

Presentation

-   Onset generally occurs in late adolescence of early adulthood

-   MSK: Inflammatory back pain (hallmark), alternating buttock pain
    with sacroiliac involvement, enthesitis

-   Extraarticular: Acute anterior uveitis, psoriasis, IBD

-   Typically encompasses 4/5 features: age of onset \<40 years,
    insidious onset, improvement with exercise, no improvement with
    rest, pain at night (improvement upon arising)

    Evaluation

-   Labs: No specific laboratory tests for AS

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   HLA-B27 is often present, though not necessary for diagnosis

-   Elevated CRP and ESR in 50-70% of pts with active AS and less
    frequently elevated in pts with non-radiographic subtype

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Imaging

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   X-ray and MRI: joint space narrowing and sclerosis secondary to
    erosive changes in SI joint, pelvis, and/or spine; bony ankylosis
    /fusion can eventually be seen in progressive disease

-   MRI can reveal inflammatory changes; helpful in non-radiographic
    (X-ray negative) subtype

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Classification criteria is used for diagnostic purposes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Assessment of SpondyloArthritis International Society Criteria
    (2011): ≥3mos back pain before 45yo and either sacroiliitis on
    imaging + ≥1 other axial spondyloarthritis (SpA) feature OR HLA-B27
    positive + ≥2 SpA features

-   SpA features: arthritis, dactylitis, enthesitis, psoriasis, IBD,
    uveitis, FHx, HLA-B27

    Management

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Initial therapy: NSAIDs for symptomatic axial spondyloarthropathies.
    Occasionally NSAIDs alone improve symptoms and are the only
    medications required

-   Refractory symptoms: TNF inhibitors followed by IL-17 inhibitors
    (second option, most effective in pts with concomitant psoriasis).
    JAK inhibitors are also improved.

-   Physical therapy: intensive rehabilitation and exercise improve
    mobility and symptoms

Crystalline Arthropathies -- Thomas Horton

Gout

Presentation

-   Red, hot, swollen joint (classically affects 1st metatarsal
    phalangeal joint \[podagra\])

-   May progress to involve ankles, knees, elbows, and small joints of
    hand if untreated

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Flares may also become polyarticular over time and include systemic
    symptoms like fever

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Gout is diagnosed with combination of clinical presentation and
    arthrocentesis results

-   Lifestyle factors:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Protective: Low fat dairy, hydration, weight loss, smoking cessation

-   Promoting: Meat, seafood, alcohol, high fructose corn syrup,
    medications that lead to hyperuricemia (e.g. thiazides)

Evaluation

-   Synovial fluid analysis: See "Arthrocentesis Quick Look" section for
    more detail

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cell count and differential: WBC 20,000-100,000, \> 50% neutrophils

-   Examination for crystals under polarizing light microscopy: (order
    "Synovial Fluid Eval" so the lab knows to look for crystals)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Imaging: generally unnecessary

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   MSK ultrasound: \"Double contour sign\" (hyperechoic band = urate
    crystals deposits)

-   Radiographs: Punched out erosions or lytic areas with overhanging
    edges

-   Dual energy CT scan: crystal aggregates appear green. Not routinely
    necessary but may be helpful to identify extraarticular locations.
    Do not order without rheumatology consult.

Management\
Acute

-   Do not discontinue allopurinol during an acute gout attack

-   NSAIDs (if not contraindicated): short course (2-5 days) at full
    anti-inflammatory dose (ibuprofen 800 mg TID, indomethacin 50 mg
    TID, naproxen 500 mg BID)

-   Colchicine (avoid if GFR \<10 mL/min. Dose reduce by 50% if GFR \<50
    mL/min)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Best if used within the first 36 hours of an attack. Much less
    effective if started later.

-   Dosing: 1.2 mg then 0.6 mg one hour later, then 0.6 mg daily until
    clinical improvement

-   Note drug interactions that may require dose adjustment of
    colchicine: Statins, diltiazem, fluconazole, cyclosporine,
    tacrolimus, clarithromycin, etc.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Steroids

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ideally intra-articular if single joint affected and infection has
    been ruled out

-   Oral prednisone, dose 0.5mg/kg/day until clinical improvement then
    taper over 7-14 days

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Anakinra 100mg QD for three days (or QOD for CrCl \<30). Requires
    rheumatology consult. For pts with contraindications to all other
    treatments

Chronic

-   Urate Lowering Therapy (ULT)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Strong indication: \>2 attacks/year, one or more subcutaneous tophi,
    radiologic changes

-   Conditional indication: CKD 3 or worse, urolithiasis, serum urate
    \>9

-   Goal serum urate: \<6.0 mg/dL, or \<5.0 mg/dL in pts with tophi

-   ULT can precipitate an acute gout flare and should always be started
    with low-dose NSAIDs, colchicine (0.6 mg) or prednisone (5 mg daily
    or QOD)

-   Prophylaxis should be continued for at least 6 months until uric
    acid is at goal and tophi have resolved

-   Allopurinol (xanthine oxidase inhibitor): start low at 100 mg per
    day (sometimes even 50mg daily in those with advanced CKD) and
    increase as needed for target uric acid \<6 (most pts will need
    400-800 mg daily)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Adjust dose monthly (3-4 weeks). In kidney dysfunction go slower.

-   Titration of allopurinol ↓ both the risk of acute gout attacks and
    DRESS syndrome

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Genetic testing (HLA-B\*5801) recommended prior to starting for pts
    of Asian and African descent given ↑ incidence of allopurinol
    hypersensitivity if + positive allele

-   Febuxostat: alternative xanthine oxidase inhibitor that is
    metabolized by the liver for pts at risk for DRESS or SJS related to
    allopurinol. Black box warning for ↑ cardiovascular risk; more
    expensive than allopurinol

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Prophylaxis: typically colchicine 0.6mg QD if normal renal function;
    NSAIDs may also be used

-   Should be continued for at least 6 months until uric acid is at goal
    and tophi have resolved to reduce incidence of flares

-   Consider Rheumatology consult for pts with refractory serum urate
    levels \>6.0 on XOI

Additional pearls

-   There is a microscope in the rheumatology clinic at VUMC (TVC 2).
    You can page the rheumatology fellow and they are happy to help you
    use it

-   Uric acid level is often normal during acute gout flare.

-   Shifts in uric acid may be the trigger of the flare: diuresis,
    dietary changes, hospital stays

Pseudogout -- Calcium Pyrophosphate Dihydrate Crystal Deposition Disease
(CPPD)

Presentation

-   More prevalent in the elderly populations

-   Cannot distinguish from gout based on clinical features alone (red,
    hot, swollen joint)

-   Can present as "pseudo OA": wrists, MCP, glenohumeral joints

-   Can present as "pseudo RA": chronic inflammatory arthritis of the
    wrist and MCPs that may be punctuated by flares

Evaluation

-   Synovial fluid analysis: See "Arthrocentesis Quick Look" section for
    more detail

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cell count and differential: WBC 20,000 to 100,000, \>50%
    neutrophils

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   X-ray: chondrocalcinosis (thin calcified line present in
    fibrocartilage) in the joint space; specifically seen in the
    meniscus of the knee joint or triangular fibrocartilage just distal
    to the ulna in the wrist

Management

-   Typically follows the same treatment used for acute gout attacks
    (see above, little evidence)

-   Treatment based on symptoms ranges from NSAIDs (1^st^ line) to
    colchicine, HCQ, and steroids. Can also use anakinra in acute cases
    with consult to rheumatology.

    Additional Information

-   CPPD can be associated with other disorders: hyperparathyroidism,
    hemochromatosis, hypomagnesemia, hypophosphatemia, and familial
    hypocalciuric hypercalcemia

-   Consider further workup for these conditions, especially in a
    younger pt.

Inflammatory Myopathies -- Tina Arkee

Background

-   Heterogenous group of disorders that classically present with
    proximal muscle weakness, although some may present with systemic
    features (ILD, rashes, inflammatory arthritis, mechanics hands,
    Raynaud phenomenon)

-   Subtypes: dermatomyositis (DM), polymyositis (PM), antisynthetase
    antibody syndrome associated myositis, immune-mediated necrotizing
    myopathy (IMNM), inclusion body myositis (IBM)

-   Additional myopathies: statin-induced myopathy, metabolic
    (hypothyroid, electrolyte), viral/infection myositis, diabetic
    myonecrosis

-   Important point: PMR= painful, preserved strength vs inflammatory
    myopathy = painless weakness

-   Consider screening patients for underlying malignancy -- up to
    15-30% of cases are associated with malignancy

Presentation

-   Acute vs. Chronic

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute or subacute: DM, PM, IMNM

-   Gradual and progressive: IBM

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Distribution of weakness

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Proximal and symmetric: DM, PM, IMNM

-   Distal and asymmetric: IBM (often involves weakness of finger flexor
    muscles)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Systemic signs or symptoms: fever, rash, dyspnea, dysphagia,
    arthritis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   DM: Gottron's papules, heliotrope rash, shawl sign, mechanics hands

-   Anti-synthetase syndrome: cough/dyspnea, arthritis, Raynaud's or
    mechanics hands

-   IBM: can present with dysphagia; advanced cases may present with
    muscle atrophy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consider patient's medications including statins and chronic
    prednisone

Evaluation

-   Labs: CMP, TSH, CK level, LDH and aldolase

-   Extended myositis panel (screens of antibodies that include but ar
    not limited to anti-Jo1 and anti-Mi2)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   MDA5 Ab is associated with rapidly progressing ILD, which may
    present with AHRF

-   TIF1 and NXP2 Abs are associated with underlying malignancy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   EMG: useful for ruling out neuromuscular etiologies

-   MRI extremity/affected muscle group: can help guide biopsies and
    evaluate edema on T2 and STIR (high signal intensity on these
    sequences may reflect active inflammation) and fatty replacement
    (reflects muscle damage) on T1.

-   Skin biopsy in dermatomyositis: "interface dermatitis," notably the
    same findings as skin biopsy of lupus rashes

-   Muscle biopsy: gold standard for diagnosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Do not do biopsy in same muscle as EMG done

-   Dermatomyositis: perifascicular and perivascular inflammatory
    infiltrate (CD4 T cells and pDCs)

-   Polymyositis: endomysial inflammatory infiltrate (CD8 T cells)

-   IMNM: muscle fibers in various stages of necrosis, scant
    inflammatory infiltrate

-   IBM: endomysial inflammatory infiltrate, intracellular vacuoles,
    protein aggregation

Management

-   Consult Rheumatology

-   1st line for DM and PM: high dose steroids (1mg/kg/day prednisone)
    for 4-6 weeks PLUS steroid sparing treatment (methotrexate,
    azathioprine, or mycophenolate mofetil)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Can add IVIG for severe cases if cost is not an issue

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   1st line for IMNM: high dose steroids for 4-6 weeks PLUS IVIG and
    rituximab

-   If statin induced: stop statin or switch to lower intensity

-   Refractory cases: abatacept or tofacitinib

Psoriatic Arthritis (PSA) -- Tina Arkee

Background

-   Men and women women are equally affected, average of of onset 30-50,
    and may have a family history of psoriasis

-   Up to 30% of patients with psoriasis develop arthritis at some point
    in their disease course

-   Psoriasis precedes the development of arthritis in most cases

-   Patients may experience trauma to the affected joint prior to
    development of arthritis (Koebner phenomenon)

-   Multigenic autoimmune disease that involves inflammatory infiltrate
    (likely drive by CD8 T cells) to entheses, synovial tissue, and skin

-   Classified under seronegative arthritis, though up to 15% of
    patients will have serologic positivity (RF most common)

    Presentation

-   Multiple patterns of joint involvement: DIP arthritis (most common),
    asymmetric oligoarthritis (large joint involvement in addition to
    small joints), symmetric polyarthritis (may look like RA), axial
    arthritis (involves the spine and SI joints), arthritis mutilans
    (severe destructive joint disease leading to osteolysis and
    shortening of digits)

-   Enthesitis: inflammation of tendon and ligament insertion sites,
    including the Achilles tendon, patellar tendon, and spinous
    processes of vertebral bodies

-   Tenosynovitis: flexor tendons of hands and posterior tibial tendons
    often involved

-   Dactylitis: diffuse swelling of a single finger or toe (sausage
    digit). Acute dactylitis presents with a red, hot, tender, swollen
    digit, whereas chronically affected digits are often just swollen.

-   Extra-articular manifestations: nail changes (pitting, ridging,
    onycholysis), psoriasis plaque, chronic bilateral uveitis,
    conjunctivitis

-   Comorbidities: Decreased bone mineral density, psychiatric disease
    (depression, anxiety), hyperuricemia, increased risk of
    CVD/metabolic syndrome/DM/fatty liver

Evaluation

-   Laboratory data: CBC, BMP, uric acid, ESR, CRP, could consider HIV
    testing

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Autoimmune testing to rule out other conditions: ANA (shouldn't have
    high titer positivity), RF (positive in 2-10%), anti-CCP

-   HLA-B27: present in 25-30% patients; may be helpful as one of the
    genetic markers that identifies patients at risk for axial disease
    or acute anterior uveitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Imaging

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   X-rays often show evidence of both bone erosion and new bone
    formation, such as the "pencil in cup" deformity (often involves the
    DIP), osteolysis leading to digital shortening, bone spurs at
    entheses, periosteal reactions (new bone formation around eroded
    sites), and ankylosis (fusion of adjacent joints).

-   MRI changes can be more sensitive in detecting articular and soft
    tissue inflammation and sacroiliitis; however, these do not always
    correlate with clinical symptoms

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CASPAR criteria for diagnosis are \>90% sensitive and specific for
    PsA. Need 3 out of 5 to meet diagnostic criteria

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Current psoriasis, a personal history of psoriasis, or family
    history of psoriasis

-   Psoriatic nail findings observed on physical exam

-   Negative test for RF

-   Current dactylitis or a history of dactylitis documented by a
    rheumatologist

-   Xray evidence of juxta-articular new bone formation in the affected
    hand or foot

Management

-   Peripheral arthritis or dactylitis: choice depends on severity of
    disease

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mild arthritis: NSAIDs (e.g. naproxen 375-500mg BID)

-   Moderate or resistant to NSAIDs: conventional DMARDS like MTX
    15-25mg q weekly or LEF 20mg QD, occasionally apremilast (PDE4
    inhibitor) if avoiding biologics

-   Severe (many joints, erosive, functional limitation) or no response
    to above: biologic DMARD usually TNF inhibitor (infliximab,
    adalimumab, etanercept); if no response, trial to another TNF
    inhibitor before next step. If TNFi are contraindicated OR psoriasis
    is severe, try an anti-IL17a biologic (secukinumab, ixekizumab).
    Patients with concomitant IBD may benefit from anti-IL12/IL-23
    agents (ustekizumab). Anti-IL17 biologics are contraindicated in
    patients w/IBD.

-   Refractory to two TNFi/IL-12/IL-23: consider the JAK inhibitor
    tofacitinib

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Avoid oral glucocorticoids given risk of developing erythroderma or
    pustular psoriasis

-   Nonpharmacologic: PT/OT, exercise, weight loss, nutritionist
    referral for metabolic syndrome

Rheumatoid Arthritis -- Anika Morgado

Background

-   Inflammatory disorder of synovial joints, typically polyarticular,
    that results in proliferation of synovial tissue leading to loss of
    articular cartilage and juxta articular bone

    Presentation

-   Usually insidious onset of polyarticular, often symmetric joint pain
    and swelling; often with morning stiffness (i.e. \>30min)

-   Most common joings: MCPs, PIPs, wrists, ankles, MTPs, knees;
    classically spares DIPs

-   Axial skeleton is usually spared, other than in severe disease when
    C1-C2 can be affected (pts usually need spinal imaging before
    surgical procedures or intubation)

-   Systemic symptoms: fatigue, widespread pain, comorbid psychiatric
    disease (depression)

-   Extra-articular manifestations: only in seropositive pts

-   Osteopenia, rheumatoid nodules (usually on skin but can form
    anywhere including lungs), sicca symptoms, scleritis, ILD,
    constrictive pericarditis, rheumatoid vasculitis, anemia,
    neutropenia (associated splenomegaly)

-   RA is an independent risk factor for CAD

    Evaluation

-   Diagnosis: Clinical symptoms above with physical exam concerning for
    active synovitis/inflammatory joint changes

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   MCP subluxation, ulnar deviation, Swan and Boutonnieres deformities
    are late findings of untreated RA

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \~75-80% of pts test positive for RF, anti CCP (more specific), or
    both. Up to \~20% seronegative

-   RF can be nonspecific, seen in any disease with chronic stimulation
    of humoral immune system (HBV, HC, Sjogren's, lymphoma,
    cryogobulinemia)

-   Labs: ESR and CRP (usually elevated in active disease and degree of
    elevation tends to correlate with disease activity, CBC, CMP, hep B,
    hep C, TB screening (treatment planning)

-   Imaging: hand and foot plain films

Management

-   Early diagnosis and use of DMARDs are key with goal of early
    remission or low disease activity. Most joint damage begins eary in
    disease course

-   Start with MTX weekly (with folic acid) in most pts

-   NSAIDs/systemic glucocorticoids can be initiated simultaneously to
    radpily reduce symptoms/disease activity while MTX takes effect
    (weeks to months for peak)

-   If pts cannot take MTX, trial HDQ, SSZ, or LEF

-   If poor response to MTX, usually trial combination therapy

-   MTX + SSZ and HCQ in resource limited settings or biologics
    contraindications

-   MTX + TNF inhibitor or JAK inhibitor

Sarcoidosis -- Lale Ertuglu

Background

-   Multisystem disordered defined by forming noncaseating granulomas in
    different tissues

Presentation

-   Constitutional symptoms: fatigue, night sweats, weight loss, fevers,
    arthralgias, myalgias

-   Pulmonary symptoms (most common): dyspnea, cough, and chest pain

-   Extrapulmonary manifestations

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cutaneous: Highly variable, but present in 25% of patients

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Papules, macules, or plaques commonly involving neck, upper back,
    extremities

-   Lupus pernio: indurated, violaceous bumps on nose, lips, cheeks,
    ears

-   Erythema nodosum

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Neuro

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Affects 5-10% of patients; involving any part of CNS or PNS

-   CN palsies, hypothalamic/pituitary dysfunction, seizures, myelopathy
    or radiculopathy, hydrocephalus, aseptic meningitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Cardiac

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Granulomas can affect pericardium, myocardium and endocardium
    resulting in valvular disorders, conduction system and
    cardiomyopathy

-   Arrhythmias are most common manifestation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Liver/Spleen

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Granulomas in liver and spleen can lead to elevated LFTs, cirrhosis,
    anemia, leukopenia and thrombocytopenia (splenic sequestration)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Ocular

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Uveitis, secondary glaucoma, retinal vasculitis,
    keratoconjunctivitis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Lofgren Syndrome

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Acute presentation with fever, bilateral hilar adenopathy, erythema
    nodosum or ankle arthralgia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Incidental finding in chest imaging: \>90% of patients have
    pulmonary or thoracic lymphadenopathy on presentation and \~50% of
    patients present with only incidental radiological findings

Evaluation

-   Combination of clinical features, radiographic manifestations,
    exclusion of other similarly presenting diseases, and noncaseating
    granulomas on pathology

-   CXR: hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy ± pulmonary infiltrates.
    CXR stages are defined as below (stages do not represent disease
    activity)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stage 1: bilateral hilar adenopathy only

-   Stage 2: bilateral hilar adenopathy + pulmonary infiltrates

-   Stage 3: pulmonary infiltrates without hilar adenopathy

-   Stage 4: pulmonary fibrosis that mainly involves upper lung zones

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High-Resolution chest CT: Lymphadenopathy (bilateral and symmetric),
    perilymphatic micro or macronodules, fibrotic changes (reticular
    opacities, traction bronchiectasis, volume loss, cysts)

-   PFTs: may show restrictive disease (decreased TLC & VC) and
    diffusion impairment (reduced DLCO). Occasionally obstructive with
    endobronchial disease.

-   Labs: CBC w/ diff, CMP, UA, quant-gold for TB or tuberculin skin
    test, HIV. Depending on endemic fungi, serologic testing for
    histoplasmosis or coccidiomycosis can also be included.

-   ECG: should be obtained since AV block is the most common finding of
    cardiac sarcoidosis.

-   Biopsy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Important to rule out mimics. The differential for "noncaseating
    granulomas" is extensive, including lymphoma and fungal infections

-   Not required for patients with asymptomatic bilateral hilar
    adenopathy or pathognomonic presentations including Lofgren syndrome
    and some cases of lupus pernio

Management

-   Most do not require therapy: monitor symptoms, CXR, PFTs at 3-6
    month intervals

-   Indications for treatment: progressive disease or severe disease at
    presentation

-   Mainstay of treatment is oral steroids

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Dosing usually 0.3-0.6 mg/kg daily for 4-6 weeks

-   If only symptom is cough, could consider inhaled glucocorticoids

-   If unresponsive or unable to tolerate steroids may require
    alternative agents (MTX, AZA, TNFi)

Scleroderma (Systemic Sclerosis) -- Eva Niklinska and Raeann Whitney

Background

-   Distinguish from localized scleroderma (morphea or linear
    scleroderma) which is dermal fibrosis without internal organ
    involvement

-   2 Major Subtypes of Generalized / Systemic Scleroderma (SSc):

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Limited cutaneous (lcSSc): Skin thickening limited to the neck,
    face, or distal to elbows and knees; spares the truck and proximal
    extremities. Raynaud's may develop years before other
    manifestations, which then slowly accumulate over 5-10 years.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   \+ anticentromere antibody

    -   Renal crisis is rare

    -   High risk for developing PAH

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Diffuse cutaneous: skin thickening extends proximal to the
    elbows/knees or trunk; rapid development of cutaneous and multiorgan
    involvement

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   More associated with anti-Scl-70 ab

-   Typically more abrupt onset and rapid progression compared to
    limited

-   High risk for progressive ILD

-   \+ RNA polymerase III Ab = high risk of renal crisis, higher risk
    for malignancy

Presentation

-   CREST: Calcinosis cutis, Raynaud phenomenon, Esophageal dysmotility,
    Sclerodactyly, Telangiectasia (CREST syndrome is no longer a
    discrete diagnosis but incorporated into lcSSc)

-   Systemic: fatigue, weight loss

-   Vascular: Raynaud's +/- digital tip ulcers, telangiectasias,
    nailfold capillaroscopy with dilated capillary loops

-   Skin: Sclerodactyly, loss of facial wrinkles, decreased oral
    aperture

-   MSK: arthralgias, myalgias, flexion contractures

-   GI: Esophageal or intestinal dysmotility, GERD, GAVE (watermelon
    stomach)

-   Pulm: ILD (NSIP, UIP), pulmonary arterial hypertension

-   Cardiac: pericardial effusions, myocarditis, cardiomyopathy,
    conduction system disease

-   Renal: renal crisis (onset of malignant HTN, greatest risk in first
    5 years)

Evaluation

-   2013 ACR/EULAR Classification Criteria 🡪 weight-based symptom
    scoring  

-   Labs: ANA w/ Reflex, Scl70, anticentromere, RNA pol III (separate
    order in Epic, increased risk of scleroderma renal disease)

-   Imaging/Procedures: Baseline PFTs, lung HRCT, TTE, EKG, 6-minute
    walk test

-   Skin biopsy: Not often used for dx, may be required to differentiate
    other rare disorders (eosinophilic fasciitis, scleroderma,
    scleromyxedema)

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  2013 ACR/EULAR Classification Criteria    Sub-items            Weight
  Items                                                          
  ----------------------------------------- -------------------- --------
  Skin thickening of fingers of both hands                       9
  extending proximal to metacarpophalangeal                      
  (MCP) joints                                                   

  Skin thickening of fingers (only count    Puffy fingers\       2\
  the highest score)                        Whole finger, distal 4
                                            to MCP               

  Fingertip lesions (only count the highest Digital tip ulcers\  2\
  score)                                    Pitting scars        3

  Telangiectasia                                                 2

  Abnormal nailfold capillaries                                  2

  Pulmonary arterial hypertension and/or                         2
  interstitial lung disease                                      

  Raynaud's phenomenon                                           3

  Scleroderma-related antibodies (any of                         3
  anti-centromere, anti-topoisomerase I                          
  \[anti-ScL 70\], anti-RNA polymerase III)                      

  *Pts with a total score of ≥9 are                              
  classified as having definite systemic                         
  sclerosis (sensitivity 91%, specificity                        
  92%)*                                                          
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Management

-   Organ-Based Symptomatic Therapy

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Raynauds: CCB (amlodipine, nifedipine), topical nitroglycerin

-   GERD: PPI

-   Renal: Monitor BP and Cr

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Scleroderma renal crisis: Abrupt onset of HTN and renal dysfunction
    that typically presents early in disease course (can precede skin
    thickening)

-   Labs: Elevated Cr, proteinuria, MAHA, elevated renin

-   Treatment: Short acting ACEi (captopril, enalapril), may require HD

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ILD: Periodic PFTs (isolated DLCO may suggest PAH); monitor for
    respiratory symptoms, pulmonology referral

-   Cardiac/PAH: annual TTE, cardiology referral

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Systemic Immunosuppression (if progressive skin thickening or organ
    involvement)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   MTX, MMF, cyclophosphamide, if refractory rituximab, IVIG 

-   Nintedanib may be used in combination with immunosuppression

Systemic Lupus Erythematous (SLE) -- Lale Ertuglu

Background

-   Characterized autoantibody formation to nuclear material and other
    cellular antigens, resulting in activation of complement and
    multisystem inflammation

-   More common in women, age of onset usually 16-55

    Presentation:

-   Constitutional: fatigue (most common complaint), fevers, myalgia,
    weight loss

-   Joints: arthralgias and arthritis (usually polyarticular, symmetric,
    migratory and nonerosive), Raynaud's.

-   Mucocutaneous: malar rash, discoid skin lesions, photosensitivity,
    painless oral (usually palatal) ulcers, nasal ulcers, scarring
    alopecia from discoid lupus is specific (vs non-scarring diffuse
    alopecia which is common)

-   Cardiac: pericarditis (\~25% of pts will develop at some point in
    disease course), verrucous (Libman-sacks) endocarditis, myocarditis,
    increased risk CAD

-   Hematologic: anemia of chronic disease (most common), leukopenia,
    ITP, AIHA

-   Renal: Lupus nephritis is the most common organ-threatening
    manifestation, can be refractory to therapy. Diagnosed and
    classified with renal biopsy.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Renal biopsy needed when Cr is rising, or there is persistent
    proteinuria or hematuria in UA

-   Class I and II are usually clinically silent. Class III and IV
    typically present as nephritic syndrome, class V mostly presents as
    nephrotic syndrome. Most patients present as an overlap (such as
    III + V or IV +V)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Pulmonary: pleuritis (if chronic may be complicated by shrinking
    lung syndrome), pleural effusion, ILD, pHTN

-   Neurologic: stroke, cerebritis, psychosis, mononeuritis multiplex

-   Ophtho: keratoconjunctivitis sicca (2/2 Sjogren's syndrome)

-   GI: dysphagia due to esophageal dysmotility, intestinal
    pseudo-obstruction, elevation of LFTs (significant liver disease is
    rare)

Evaluation

-   Labs: CBC, BMP, UA with sediment, Ur Pr:Cr ratio, inflammatory
    markers (nonspecific), ANA (high sensitivity), anti-dS DNA,
    anti-Smith, complement levels (C3 & C4 usually low)

-   Consider antiphospholipid antibody testing (lupus anticoagulant,
    anti-cardiolipin, anti- β2 glycoprotein)

    Management

+-------------------------------+-------+---------------------+-------+
| Clinical Criteria             | W     | Laboratory Criteria | W     |
|                               | eight |                     | eight |
+===============================+=======+=====================+=======+
| Constitutional                | 2     | **Antiphospholipid  | 2     |
|                               |       | antibodies**        |       |
| Fever                         |       |                     |       |
|                               |       | -   (Lupus AC, CL,  |       |
|                               |       |     β2GP1)          |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+---------------------+-------+
| Hematologic                   | 3     | **Complement        | 3     |
|                               |       | proteins**          |       |
| Leukopenia                    | 4     |                     | 4     |
|                               |       | Low C3 OR C4        |       |
| Thrombocytopenia              | 4     |                     |       |
|                               |       | Low C3 AND C4       |       |
| Autoimmune hemolysis          |       |                     |       |
|                               |       | **SLE-specific      |       |
|                               |       | antibodies**        |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+---------------------+-------+
| Neuropsychiatric              | 2     | Anti-dsDNA OR       | 6     |
|                               |       |                     |       |
| Delirium                      | 3     | Anti-Smith          |       |
|                               |       |                     |       |
| Psychosis                     | 4     |                     |       |
|                               |       |                     |       |
| Seizure                       |       |                     |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+---------------------+-------+
| Mucocutaneous                 | 2     |                     |       |
|                               |       |                     |       |
| Non-scarring alopecia         | 2     |                     |       |
|                               |       |                     |       |
| Oral ulcers                   | 4     |                     |       |
|                               |       |                     |       |
| Subacute cutaneous OR discoid | 6     |                     |       |
| lupus                         |       |                     |       |
|                               |       |                     |       |
| Acute cutaneous lupus         |       |                     |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+---------------------+-------+
| Serosal                       | 5     |                     |       |
|                               |       |                     |       |
| Pleural or pericardial        | 6     |                     |       |
| effusion                      |       |                     |       |
|                               |       |                     |       |
| Acute pericarditis            |       |                     |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+---------------------+-------+
| Musculoskeletal               | 6     |                     |       |
|                               |       |                     |       |
| Joint involvement (2+ joints) |       |                     |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+---------------------+-------+
| Renal                         | 4     |                     |       |
|                               |       |                     |       |
| Proteinuria (\>0.5g/24h)      | 8     |                     |       |
|                               |       |                     |       |
| Renal Bx Class II or V lupus  | 10    |                     |       |
| nephritis                     |       |                     |       |
|                               |       |                     |       |
| Renal Bx Class III or IV      |       |                     |       |
| lupus nephritis               |       |                     |       |
+-------------------------------+-------+---------------------+-------+

Management

-   HCQ is the first line treatment: 200-400mg/day (5mg/kg/d)

-   Need retinal screening at baseline and annually after 5 years of
    therapy

-   Not immunosuppressive

-   Safe in pregnancy with improved pregnancy outcomes and reduced
    neonatal lupus

-   Glucocorticoids: ideally short-term. High doses may be used for life
    or organ threatening disease

-   Other therapies: MTX, MMF, AZA, RTX, belimumab, anifrolumab

-   Renal disease

-   Immunosuppression: MMF, cyclophosphamide, belimumab, voclosporin --
    mostly used in combination with mycophenolate

-   Renal protection: ACEi or ARB

Vasculitis -- Hannah Angle

Background

-   Large vessel vasculitis (aorta and its major branches)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Takayasu arteritis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most commonly \<30 years old, 80-90% cases in females, greatest
    prevalence in Asia

-   Branches of aorta/aortic arch (subclavian, innominate, carotid
    arteries)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Giant cell arteritis (GCA)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most commonly \>50 years old, slight F \> M predominance

-   Cranial arteries (temporal artery), aorta and its branches

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Medium vessel vasculitis (muscular arteries that supply visceral
    organs)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Most often middle age/older adults (peaks in 5th decade of life)

-   Necrotizing vasculitis of muscular arteries (renal, mesenteric,
    arteries supplying neurons and skin)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Kawasaki's: not addressed here, most often children

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Small vessel vasculitis (arterioles, capillaries, and venules)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ANCA-associated vasculitis:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA): granulomatous; classically
    involves nasopharynx, lungs, kidneys

-   Microscopic polyangiitis (MPA): affects multiple organs but
    predilection for lungs and kidneys; in contrast to GPA, no
    nasopharynx involvement or granulomas

-   Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA): granulomatous;
    predilection for heart and lungs; associated with eosinophilia,
    chronic rhinosinusitis, asthma; uncommon \> 65 years old

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Immune-complex vasculitis: not addressed here

-   Cryoglobulinemic vasculitis (see lab section)

-   IgA vasculitis

-   Anti-GBM disease

Takayasu\'s Arteritis -- Hannah Angle

Presentation

-   Subacute constitutional symptoms: fevers, arthralgias, myalgias,
    rash, weight loss

-   CVS: angina from coronary arteritis, HTN (renal a. involvement),
    discrepant BP between arms (arterial stenosis), diminished or absent
    pulses ("pulseless disease"), carotidynia (tenderness of the carotid
    a.), arterial bruits

-   Limb claudication

-   Neuro symptoms from carotid/vertebral arteritis: vertigo, headaches,
    syncope, strokes

-   GI symptoms from mesenteric ischemia

    Evaluation

-   ESR/CRP: often elevated, though can be normal during active disease

-   Arteriography: MRA or CTA of head/neck, chest, and abdomen/pelvis

    Management

-   New arterial stenosis or aorta/carotid artery involvement: 1mg/kg
    prednisone daily (max 60-80mg) for 2-4 weeks followed by steroid
    taper

-   Organ threatening disease (coronary artery involvement, critical
    stenosis of carotid/vertebral arteries): 500-1000mg IV
    methylprednisolone daily for 1-3 days, then 1mg/kg prednisone daily
    for 2-4 weeks followed by steroid taper

Giant Cell Arteritis (GCA) -- Lauren Waskowicz

Presentation

-   Always consider in pts \>50 years old with new headache, abrupt
    vision changes (diplopia, amaurosis fugax), jaw claudication,
    temporal artery tenderness

-   \~20% of pts have clinically significant extracranial large vessel
    disease

-   Sudden, typically permanent vision loss may develop due to anterior
    ischemic optic neuropathy (AION), which develops due to occlusion of
    the posterior ciliary a. supplying the optic nerve. Non-inflammatory
    conditions may cause this as well.

-   Polymyalgia rheumatica accompanies GCA in \~50% pts, classically
    with bilateral shoulder and hip pain/stiffness (with elevated ESR,
    but normal CK)

-   \~15% of pts with polymyalgia rheumatica have GCA, but should be
    considered in all

Evaluation

-   ESR/CRP (almost always elevated), CK, TSH

-   Evaluate for any temporal artery abnormalities (tenderness to
    palpation, presence of nodules)

-   Ophthalmology evaluation if any concern for ocular involvement

-   Temporal a. biopsy by vascular surgery (typical in the US) OR
    temporal a. ultrasound (typical in Europe)

-   If high suspicion for GCA with negative biopsy or ultrasound,
    perform further imaging to evaluate for large vessel involvement
    (CT/CTA or MRI/MRA of aorta and/or branches)

Management

-   Treatment: increase glucocorticoid dosing + addition of steroid
    sparing agent

-   Start glucocorticoids as soon as GCA is suspected, do not delay
    while awaiting biopsy

-   No vision loss: prednisone 1mg/kg daily (max 60 mg) for 2-4 weeks
    followed by taper

-   Vision loss/diplopia: 500-1000mg IV methylprednisolone daily for 3
    days, followed by prednisone 1mg/kg daily (max 60mg) for 2-4 weeks
    followed by steroid taper  

-   Bisphosphonates will be commonly indicated for prevention of
    glucocorticoid induced osteoporosis. A bone density test should be
    obtained at baseline to assess if other anabolic therapies should be
    used in higher risk pts.

-   Consider tocilizumab (weekly or monthly injections) as adjunctive
    therapy therapy with steroids to allow for faster steroid in pts at
    higher risk for glucocorticoid-related side effects (since most pts
    with GCA are elderly, this applies to most pts)

Polyarteritis Nodosa (PAN) -- Hannah Angle

Presentation

-   Constitutional symptoms: fatigue, weakness, fevers, arthralgias,
    myalgias, rash, weight loss

-   Evidence of multisystem involvement:

-   Asymmetric polyneuropathy with motor and sensory deficits (foot
    drop, radial/ulnar neuropathy)

-   Skin manifestations: livedo reticularis, palpable purpura, ulcers,
    tender erythematous nodules, bullae, vesicles

-   HTN (renal arteritis)

-   Abdominal pain and melena (mesenteric arteritis)

-   Ischemic cardiomyopathy (coronary arteritis)

-   Testicular pain (orchitis)

-   Classically spares the lungs (consider other dx if pulmonary
    complaints)

Evaluation

-   ESR/CRP, CK, TSH

-   Hepatitis panel (HBV/HCV can cause secondary PAN)

-   Arteriography: MRI, CT, or angiogram with classic "string of pearls"
    appearance 

-   Biopsy: segmental transmural inflammation of muscular arteries,
    fibrinoid necrosis of arterial wall (no granulomas, presence
    suggests another process)

Management

-   Mild disease (e.g. isolated cutaneous disease): prednisone 1mg/kg
    daily (max 60-80mg) for 4 weeks followed by steroid taper

-   Moderate disease: cyclophosphamide + prednisone 1mg/kg daily (max
    60-80mg) for 4 weeks followed by steroid taper

-   Severe/life-threatening disease (renal failure, significant
    proteinuria, GI/cardiac/neurologic involvement): cyclophosphamide +
    500-1000mg IV methylprednisolone daily for 3 days, followed by
    prednisone 1mg/kg daily (max 60mg) for 4 weeks followed by steroid
    taper  

Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (GPA) -- Hannah Angle

Background

-   Necrotizing vasculitis of small vessels characterized by
    granulomatous inflammation

Presentation

-   Constitutional symptoms: fevers, fatigue, weight loss

-   Vasculitis: pulmonary hemorrhage, mononeuritis multiplex,
    glomerulonephritis (hematuria, proteinuria)

-   Granulomatous inflammation: sinus and/or middle ear involvement,
    rhinorrhea, epistaxis, pulmonary nodule, cavitary pulmonary lesions
    (dyspnea, cough, hemoptysis)

Evaluation

-   ANCA + (typically PR3-cANCA)

-   ESR/CRP, ANA, anti-GBM, C3/C4, cryoglobulins, HBV/HCV, HIV

-   UA with microscopy (hematuria, proteinuria, RBC casts, dysmorphic
    RBCs)

-   CT chest if pulmonary symptoms

-   Biopsy: necrotizing granulomatous vasculitis, pauci-immune
    glomerulonephritis

-   Clinical Pearl: If you suspect renal disease (elevated Cr,
    hematuria), ask the renal or rheum fellow to help spin the urine to
    evaluate for RBC casting or dysmorphic cells. Quick way to confirm
    active GN, since renal biopsy takes time to arrange.

Management

-   Mild-moderate disease: MTX + prednisone 0.5 mg/kg/day followed by
    steroid taper

-   Severe disease: rituximab (first line) + prednisone 1mg/kg/day
    (60-80mg max)

-   If failed response to rituximab, cyclophosphamide can be used.

-   For pts with RPGN, pulmonary hemorrhage, mononeuritis multiplex or
    optic neuritis: IV methylprednisone 7-15mg/kg/d (1000mg max) x3d for
    induction therapy

-   DVT ppx (high risk for DVT/PE)

Microscopic Polyangiitis (MPA) -- Hannah Angle

Presentation

-   Similar to GPA, but without granulomatous involvement (no upper
    respiratory tract involvement or pulmonary nodules); classically
    only involves lungs and kidneys

Evaluation

-   ANCA + (typically MPO-pANCA)

-   ESR/CRP, ANA, anti-GBM, C3/C4, cryoglobulins, HBV/HCV, HIV

-   UA with microscopy (hematuria, proteinuria, RBC casts, dysmorphic
    RBCs)

-   CT chest if pulmonary symptoms

-   Biopsy: necrotizing vasculitis (no granulomas), pauci-immune
    glomerulonephritis

Management

-   Same as GPA, see above

Eosinophilic Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (EGPA) -- Hannah Angle

Presentation

-   Similar to GPA/MPA. Predominant symptoms include atopic symptoms
    (asthma, rhinosinusitis) and peripheral eosinophilia.

-   Vasculitis manifestations are more rare, and when they occur,
    mononeuritis multiplex is the most common, unlike pulmonary
    hemorrhage or renal involvement in GPA/MPA.

-   Cardiac involvement (accounts for 50% deaths from EGPA): coronary
    arteritis, myocarditis, heart failure, arrhythmias

-   Skin involvement (\>50%): tender subcutaneous nodules

Evaluation

-   ANCA + (typically MPO-pANCA, positive in about 50-60% of pts)

-   Peripheral eosinophilia

-   IgE, ANA, RF, C3/C4

-   Biopsy: necrotizing granulomatous vasculitis, eosinophilic
    infiltrates with fibrinoid necrosis, pauci-immune glomerulonephritis

Management

-   Mild-moderate disease: prednisone 0.5-1 mg/kg/day for 6-12 weeks
    followed by steroid taper

-   Severe: cyclophosphamide + prednisone 0.5-1 mg/kg/day for 6-12 weeks
    followed by steroid taper

-   For pts with life-threatening multiorgan involvement (cardiac,
    pulmonary, renal, neurologic): IV methylprednisone 1000mg daily x 3
    days for induction therapy

-   ACR guidelines now also recommendd mepolizumab for non-severe
    disease (instead of rituximab or cyclophosphamide) plus steroids as
    initial induction therapy. Severe disease still requires rituximab
    or cyclophosphamide)

-   DVT ppx (high risk for DVT/PE)

Toxicology

Editor: Jennifer Marvin-Peek, MD

Faculty Editor: Rebecca E. Bruccoleri, MD and Saralyn R. Williams, MD

Toxidrome Overview -- Quinton Taylor

+--------------+---------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Toxidrome    | Agent         | Symptoms            | Antidote      |
+==============+===============+=====================+===============+
| Cholinergic  | Insecticides  | Muscarinic:         | Atropine      |
|              | (e.g.         | Defecation,         | (with         |
|              | orga          | Urination, Miosis,  | pralidoxime   |
|              | nophosphates) | Bradycardia,        | if            |
|              |               | Bronchosecretions,  | or            |
|              | p             | Emesis,             | ganophosphate |
|              | hysostigmine, | Lacrimation,        | poisoning)    |
|              | neostigmine,  | Salivation,         |               |
|              | py            | Sweating            |               |
|              | ridostigmine, | (DUMBBELSS)         |               |
|              | pilocarpine,  |                     |               |
|              |               | Nicotinic:          |               |
|              | nerve agents  | Mydriasis,          |               |
|              | (e.g. Sarin)  | Tachycardia,        |               |
|              |               | Weakness,           |               |
|              |               | Hypertension,       |               |
|              |               | Fasciculations      |               |
|              |               | (MTWtHF)            |               |
+--------------+---------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Ant          | An            | Hyperthermia, dry   | Supportive    |
| icholinergic | tihistamines, | skin, mydriasis,    | care,         |
|              | an            | delirium,           | consider      |
|              | tipsychotics, | hallucinations,     |               |
|              | an            | tachycardia,        | physostigmine |
|              | tidepressants | urinary retention,  | with          |
|              | (TCAs),       | seizures ("Hot as a | toxicology    |
|              | ant           | hare, red as a      |               |
|              | i-parkinsons, | beet, dry as a      |               |
|              | atropine,     | bone, blind as a    |               |
|              | scopolamine   | bat, mad as a       |               |
|              |               | hatter")            |               |
+--------------+---------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Sym          | Cocaine,      | Hyperthermia,       | None,         |
| pathomimetic | amphetamines, | mydrasis,           | supportive    |
|              | bath salts,   | diaphoresis,        | care;         |
|              | synthetic     | tachycardia,        | be            |
|              | cannabinoids, | arrythmias,         | nzodiazepines |
|              | sedat         | hypertension,       | as needed\*   |
|              | ive/hyponotic | seizures            |               |
|              | withdrawal,   |                     |               |
|              | pse           |                     |               |
|              | udoephedrine, |                     |               |
|              | caffeine      |                     |               |
+--------------+---------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Opioid       | Morphine,     | Miosis,             | Naloxone      |
|              | heroin,       | hypoventilation,    |               |
|              | h             | somnolence,         |               |
|              | ydromorphone, | comatose,           |               |
|              | fentanyl      | bradycardia,        |               |
|              |               | hypotension         |               |
+--------------+---------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Sedat        | Benzos,       | CNS depression,     | None,         |
| ive-hypnotic | barbiturates, | confusion, stupor,  | supportive    |
|              | alcohol,      | coma                | care only     |
|              | zolpidem      |                     |               |
+--------------+---------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Ha           | P             | Hallucinations,     | None,         |
| llucinogenic | hencyclidine, | depersonalization,  | supportive    |
|              | LSD, MDMA     | agitation,          | care only     |
|              | "Ecstasy"     | mydriasis           |               |
|              |               | (usually),          |               |
|              |               | tachycardia,        |               |
|              |               | hypertension,       |               |
|              |               | nystagmus           |               |
+--------------+---------------+---------------------+---------------+
| Serotonin    | SSRIs, SNRIs, | Hyperreflexia,      | Supportive    |
| syndrome     | MOAIs         | myoclonus,          | care;         |
|              |               | diaphoresis,        | be            |
|              |               | flushing, diarrhea, | nzodiazepines |
|              |               | hyperthermia,       | as needed\*;  |
|              |               | tachycardia,        | contact       |
|              |               | confusion,          | toxicology    |
|              |               | agitation, coma     | prior to      |
|              |               |                     | using         |
|              |               |                     | c             |
|              |               |                     | yproheptadine |
+--------------+---------------+---------------------+---------------+
| \*for        |               |                     |               |
| treatment of |               |                     |               |
| seizures,    |               |                     |               |
| tachycardia, |               |                     |               |
| h            |               |                     |               |
| ypertension, |               |                     |               |
| agitation,   |               |                     |               |
| and          |               |                     |               |
| hyperthermia |               |                     |               |
+--------------+---------------+---------------------+---------------+

General Workup

-   ABCs, evaluate vital signs, mental status, pupil size, skin
    temperature and moisture

-   Pulse ox, continuous cardiac monitoring, EKG, blood glucose

-   Beta blocker (hypo or normoglycemia) and CCB (hyperglycemia)
    toxicity

-   UDS, acetaminophen/salicylate level, ethanol levels UA, BMP, LFT,
    blood gas

General Management

-   Decontamination for topical exposures

-   Antidotes if known ingestions/fits appropriate toxidrome

-   Supportive care

-   Discuss with Toxicology for possible ways to enhance elimination of
    the toxin (e.g. diuresis, alkalinization, dialysis, etc.)

Management of Specific Overdoses -- Lauren Chan

There are 5 main classes of drugs/toxins that induce bradycardia and
hypotension (ABCDO): Alpha-2 agonist, Beta-blockers, Calcium channel
blockers, Digoxin and cardiac glycosides, Acetylcholinesterase
inhibitors (Organophosphates)

Alpha-2 Agonists

Background

-   Ex: clonidine, dexmedetomidine, guanfacine, methyldopa, tizanidine

-   Mechanism: centrally acting inhibition of norepinephrine release 🡪↓
    noradrenergic activity

    Evaluation

-   Physical Exam: early/transient HTN, attenuated sympathetic response
    (decreased HR, BP), opioid toxidrome (pinpoint pupils, CNS
    depression, respiratory depression)

-   Laboratory abnormalities: None associated with overdose

-   EKG: sinus bradycardia

Management

-   IVF and high dose naloxone 10mg IVP followed by 5 mg/hr if there is
    no response

-   Naloxone may reverse the CNS and respiratory depression as well as
    hypotension

-   Vasopressors such as norepinephrine/epinephrine are used if naloxone
    does not work

Beta Blockers (BB's)

Background

-   Mechanism: competitively block catecholamines at beta-adrenergic
    receptors 🡪 ↓ inotropy and chronotropy; impaired gluconeogenesis and
    glycogenolysis

-   Lipophilic BB's (propranolol, metoprolol): cross the blood brain
    barrier 🡪 CNS depression

-   Membrane stabilizing BB's (propranolol): QRS prolongation,
    dysrhythmias, and seizures

-   Sotalol: potassium channel blocking properties 🡪 QTc prolongation
    and dysrhythmias

Evaluation

-   Physical Exam: CNS depression, seizures, myocardial depression,
    respiratory depression

-   Laboratory abnormalities: Hypoglycemia or normoglycemia

-   ECG: Sinus bradycardia, AV block (low grade), QRS widening
    (propranolol), QTc prolongation (sotalol)

Management

-   IVF, calcium gluconate 3 mg

-   Glucagon 10 mg over 10 min and infusion 3-5 mg/hr (need infusion
    since half-life is 6 min)

-   Vomiting can occur if administered too fast

-   Epinephrine or norepinephrine should be first line vasopressors

-   Atropine 0.5-1mg q3-5min

-   Intralipid infusion if refractory HoTN or pt codes from a lipophilic
    BB (e.g. propranolol)

-   Intralipid (Lipid Emulsion) 20% infusions: 1.5 cc/kg bolus followed
    by 0.25 cc/kg/min for 60 minutes (for 70 kg adult: 1 liter over 1
    hour) for refractory hypotension or if pt codes), max dose is 10
    ml/kg or 1200 ml whichever is greater however, there is limited
    guidance on a max dose - if using lipid emulsion therapy, please
    call Toxicology or Poison Control immediately

-   BB induced arrhythmias: sodium bicarbonate (adjunct QRS widening)
    and Mg for QTc prolongation induced Torsades de pointes

-   Significant sotolol toxicity: hemodialysis

Calcium channel blockers (CCB's)

Background

-   Two categories: Dihydropyridines (DHP) and non-dihydropyridines
    (Non-DHP)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   DHP (amlodipine, nifedipine): peripheral \> central channels,
    selectivity is lost in overdose

-   Non-DHP (diltiazem, verapamil): primarily cardiac calcium channels

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Mechanism:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   DHP: arterial vasodilation 🡪 reflex tachycardia

-   Non-DHP: peripheral vasodilation, decreased inotropy, bradycardia;
    calcium mediated insulin inhibition in the pancreas 🡪 hyperglycemia

Evaluation

-   Physical Exam: Markedly preserved mental status until pt is about to
    code

-   Labs: hyperglycemia (elevated serum glucose concentrations are
    associated with severe overdose and sequelae)

-   EKG: bradyarrhythmia, high-degree heart block (3rd degree)

Management

-   IVF, vasopressors if needed

-   Bradycardia: atropine 0.5-1mg q3-5min (not effective for second- or
    third-degree block), calcium gluconate 3g, and glucagon 10 mg over
    10 min followed by infusion 3-5 mg/h

-   Hypotension + bradycardia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High dose insulin/euglycemic therapy (HIE)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   High-dose insulin 0.5-1 unit/kg bolus followed by 0.5-1 unit/kg/hour
    infusion titrated to up to 10 units/kg/ hour. Call Toxicology
    immediately if exceeding 3 units/kg/hour

-   Give with dextrose. Titrate insulin like a pressor. Blood pressure
    may take up to 20 minutes to change

-   May increase contractility through increasing the cardiac
    utilization of glucose. Not likely to help with vasodilation or
    bradycardia

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Vasopressors (norepinephrine or epinephrine): may consider
    phenylephrine for DHT induced vasoplegic shock with tachycardia

-   Intralipid should be used in code/refractory hypotensive situations
    for lipophilic CCB's (verapamil, amlodipine, diltiazem)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   20% infusions: 1.5 cc/kg bolus followed by 0.25 cc/kg/min for 60
    minutes (for 70 kg adult: 1 liter over 1 hour) for refractory
    hypotension or if pt codes), max dose is 10 ml/kg or 1200 ml
    whichever is greater however, there is limited guidance on a max
    dose - if using lipid emulsion therapy, please call Toxicology or
    Poison Control immediately

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Methylene blue for refractory distributive shock can be considered,
    but consult Toxicology prior to using

Digoxin and Cardiac Glycosides

Background

-   Ex: Digoxin, yellow oleander, lanatoside C, foxglove, lily of the
    valley, bufo toads

-   Mechanism: blockade of Na/K ATPase 🡪 increased intracellular calcium
    🡪 increased contractility and may delay after
    depolarizations/shorten repolarization of the atria and ventricles 🡪
    trigger arrhythmias; increased vagal tone

Evaluation

-   Physical Exam: lethargy, nausea, vomiting, reported yellow halos in
    visual fields (chronic)

-   Labs: hyperkalemia (marker of acute toxicity but not the cause;
    correlates with mortality)

-   EKG: any abnormality (though Afib RVR is unlikely, more likely to
    have a regular pulse due to 3rd degree block in the setting of
    Afib), biventricular tachycardia is classic but rarely seen

Management

-   Digoxin fab fragments

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Number of vials = \[(serum level times the weight of the pt)/100\]
    rounded up. Empiric treatment 10 vials.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In acute on chronic toxicity or chronic toxicity, please contact the
    Poison Center or Medical Toxicology for guidance as less vials may
    be recommended to try to avoid adverse events from worsening heart
    failure or atrial fibrillation

-   Unclear dosing for natural toxins (often empirically 10 vials for an
    adult)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indications: hemodynamic instability, significant unstable
    arrhythmia, end organ damage secondary to hypoperfusion (renal
    failure), or potassium ≥5.0 mEq/L

-   It can also be indicated for pts with high post distribution digoxin
    levels even if they are asymptomatic. However, please contact Poison
    Control/Toxicology for guidance.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Atropine 0.5-1mg q3-5min: severe symptomatic bradycardia when
    digoxin fab fragments are not available

-   Given the sensitivity of the myocardium with digoxin, pacers can
    trigger significant dysrhythmias and only recommended if no access
    to digoxin fab fragments or fab fragment failure

Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors

Background

-   Ex: Organophosphates (e.g. insecticides), carbamates, physostigmine,
    rivastigmine, donepezil

-   Mechanism: Inhibition of the breakdown of acetylcholine 🡪 ↑
    acetylcholine 🡪 stimulation of muscarinic and nicotinic receptors

Evaluation

-   Physical exam

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Muscarinic (DUMBBELS): Diarrhea/Diaphoresis, Urination, Miosis,
    Bronchorrhea/ Bronchospasm, Bradycardia, Miosis, Emesis,
    Lacrimation, Salivation

-   Nicotinic: fasciculations, muscle weakness, and/or muscle paralysis

-   Intermediate syndrome: neurologic syndrome after resolution of
    cholinergic excess, decreased DTR, proximal muscle weakness,
    respiratory insufficiency, neck flexion weakness, CN abnormalities

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Laboratory abnormalities: Standard lab tests are not helpful.

-   EKG: sinus bradycardia, QTc prolongation

Management

-   Atropine: 1-2 mg (mild-moderate symptoms) vs 3-5mg (severe) IV
    repeated every 2-20 minutes or 1mg followed by doubling doses every
    5 minutes until bronchorrhea is no longer present followed by an
    infusion 10-20% of the loading dose per hour (max 2 mg/hour)

-   Pralidoxime: 30mg/kg (max 2g) loading dose followed by 8-10 mg/kg/hr
    (max 650mg/hr); WHO dosing is 2000 mg bolus followed by 500 mg/hr
    infusion. Consult Poison Control/ Medical Toxicology for
    acetylcholinesterase inhibitor use.

-   Seizures: Benzodiazepines

-   Secretions: Titrate atropine to dry secretions (can require large
    amounts i.e. 50 mg).

-   Bronchorrhea: Atropine as above

Alcohol

Background

-   One standard drink = 12oz regular beer = 5oz wine = 1.5oz 80%
    distilled spirit

-   Absorption primarily in duodenum/small intestine (80%) with 80-90%
    of absorption in \<60 min in ideal conditions (i.e. empty stomach)

-   Mechanism: Metabolism via alcohol dehydrogenase. Withdrawal due to
    CNS overactivity from decreased inhibitory tone (GABA) and
    unregulated excess excitation (glutamate binding to NMDA, dopamine)

Evaluation

-   Intoxication: slurred speech, disinhibition, incoordination,
    unsteady gait, memory impairment, nystagmus, stupor, coma,
    hypotension, tachycardia

-   Wenicke encephalopathy (WE): encephalopathy, oculomotor dysfunction,
    gait ataxia, HA, n/v, hallucinations (12-24 hr after last drink),
    seizures (12-48 hr), DT (72-96 hr)

-   Labs: EtOH, Peth, UDS, hypoglycemia, hyperlactatemia, hypoK, hypoMg,
    hypoCa, hypophos

Management

-   Intoxication: supportive care

-   Withdrawal: thiamine, folate, multivitamin, IV fluid for
    intravascular depletion

-   Thiamine: Administer before glucose containing fluids.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   WE prevention 100mg IV QD x3d.

-   WE treatment (high risk) 500mg IV TID x3d followed by 250mg QD x3d,
    then 100mg QD

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Psychomotor agitation: benzodiazepines (long-acting preferred)
    including diazepam, lorazepam, and chlordiazepoxide. Lorazepam for
    acute alcoholic hepatitis/liver dysfunction.

-   Diazepam: 5-10mg IV every 5-10min until appropriate sedation
    (severe) or per CIWA

-   Lorazepam: 2-4mg IV every 15-20min or per CIWA

-   Seizures: CIWA scoring and benzodiazepines. If hx DTs, consider
    phenobarbital taper. If status, consider escalation to Propofol

Opioids

Background

-   Ex: Natural opiates (morphine, codeine), semi-synthetic
    (hydrocodone, hydromorphone, oxycodone, oxymorphone, heroin,
    buprenorphine), synthetic (fentanyl, meperidine, tramadol)

-   Mechanism: Multiple receptors with wide range of clinical effects
    including sedation, analgesia, respiratory depression, GI
    dysmotility, bradycardia, miosis, anxiolysis

Evaluation

-   Intoxication: AMS, miosis, hypoventilation, decreased bowel sounds,
    seizures, coma

-   Withdrawal: mydriasis, yawning, piloerection, diaphoresis,
    rhinorrhea, increased BS

-   Laboratory abnormalities: None specific to opioid toxicity

-   EKG: QT prolongation (loperamide, methadone, very large doses of
    oxycodone), QRS widening (loperamide)

Management

-   Intoxication: Supplemental oxygenation/ventilation support, ACLS

-   Naloxone,: IV preferable, but if no access, apneic, or ciritical
    condition, can use intranasal or IM. Switch to IV when able

-   IV: 0.4-2mg q2-3min. Consider initial lower dose (0.04-0.2mg) in pts
    with opioid dependence to avoid withdrawal or if concerned for
    concomitant stimulant overdose.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If apneic, use higher doses.

-   If mildly bradypneic in a known chronic user, can try smaller doses
    repeated every 2 minutes until pt is breathing at a normal rate
    while using bag mask ventilation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Intranasal: 4 or 8mg as single dose in one nostril. Repeat q2-3min,
    alternating nostrils

-   Consider alternative etiologies of respiratory depression if no
    response after 10mg

-   Withdrawal: COWs scoring and protocol

-   Symptom control: ondansetron (nausea, vomiting), loperamide
    (diarrhea), hydroxyzine (anxiety), methocarbamol (cramps),
    dicyclomine (abdominal cramps)

-   Acute, severe: methadone or buprenorphine, do NOT use for iatrogenic
    withdrawal (i.e following naloxone administration)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Buprenorphine 4-8mg sublingual. If symptoms persist after 60min, can
    give subsequent dose. Maximum 24mg in 24hr. Usually need to discuss
    with Psych to give.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Iatrogenic or pts trying to overcome addition: clonidine 0.1-0.3mg
    q1h until symptom resolution (maximum 0.8mg/24hr) followed by taper

Sodium Channel Blockers

Background

-   Ex: Class I antiarrhythmics, tricyclic antidepressants
    (amitriptyline, imipramine) anticonvulsants (carbamazepine,
    lamotrigine), cocaine, insecticides

-   Mechanism: decreases depolarization of non-nodal cardiac myocytes

-   Consider other concomitant effects (e.g. TCA with anticholinergic
    and K channel blockade)

Evaluation

-   Pure Na channel blockade: classically bradycardia but sodium channel
    blocking drugs often have anticholinergic properties resulting in
    tachycardia

-   TCAs: typically tachycardia, cardiogenic shock, hypotension, AMS,
    seizures, respiratory depression, anticholinergic symptoms

-   Laboratory abnormalities: No specific abnormalities

-   EKG: QRS widening, QTc prolongation, ventricular dysrhythmia, new
    right axis deviation

Management

-   Sodium bicarbonate (mainstay): Initial 1-2mEq/kg bolus q5min until
    pH is 7.45 to 7.55 (QRS will hopefully narrow to \< 120 msec) 🡪
    infusion 150mEq in 1L D5W at 150ml/h (contact poison control or
    toxicology for guidance on discontinuation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Indications: hypotension, QTC \>100ms, QT prolongation

-   Goal pH: 7.5-7.55

-   Contact Poison Control or Toxicology for discontinuation guidance

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Magnesium if arrhythmias refractory to sodium bicarb

-   IVF and vasopressor support as needed

-   TCA toxicity: consider lipid emulsion (discuss with Poison Control
    prior)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Intralipid infusions: 20% infusions: 1.5 cc/kg bolus followed by
    0.25 cc/kg/min for 60 minutes (for 70 kg adult: 1 liter over 1 hour)
    for refractory hypotension or if pt codes), max dose is 10 ml/kg or
    1200 ml whichever is greater however, there is limited guidance on a
    max dose

Drug Induced QTc Prolongation -- Mohamed Salih

Background

-   QT = time of ventricular depolarization + repolarization, measured
    from the start of the Q-wave to the end of the T-wave (use the lead
    with the longest measurement)

-   Decreases with tachycardia, increases with bradycardia

-   QTc: corrected estimate of QT assuming a rate of 60 bpm

-   QTcF (Fridericia) and QTcB (Bazett, tends to overestimate QT): other
    equations used

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   A 2016 Meta-analysis (PMID 27317349) recommended QTcF over QTcB

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Prolongation: QT \> 440 ms in males or \>460 in females; usually
    concerned when QT\> 500 ms

-   Life threatening risk = Torsades de pointes (see "Wide Complex
    Tachycardias" section)

-   Two main causes of prolonged QT

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Congenital/hereditary: long QT syndrome/channelopathies

-   Acquired: drug induced, anorexia, bradycardia, MI/BBB, hypothermia,
    hypothyroidism, hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia, increased
    ICP)

-   Think of ABCDE for common offenders:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   A: Anti"A"rrythmics (think class IA (procainamide, disopyramide) and
    class III (amiodarone, sotalol, dofetilide))

-   B: Anti"B"iotics: (azoles, macrolides, quinolones)

-   C: Anti"C"ychotics: 1st gen\>2nd gen (chlorpromazine, haloperidol,
    risperidone)

-   D: Anti "D"epressants: SSRIs, TCAs

-   E: Anti"E"metics: (5-HT3 antagonists) ondansetron, also droperidol

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Other: methadone, Arsenic (chemo), quinines (antimalarials),
    hydroxychloroquine

-   Special note Zofran: Risk IV \> PO (ODT), greater using IV dose \>
    16mg, concomitant QT prolonging meds, concomitant
    congenital/acquired QT prolongation condition

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Single dose IV/PO Zofran without additional risk factors is safe.
    Obtain EKG if pt has risk factors or on QTc prolonging meds prior to
    giving Zofran or before additional dose within 2 hrs

Presentation: Most commonly asymptomatic; may have palpitations,
seizure, syncope, SCD

Evaluation

-   Always evaluate with a recent EKG. Update QTc in handoff

-   High risk (e.g QT \>500 and receiving abx ± antiemetics): can
    monitor with EKG q 2-3 days

Management

-   If stable:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Stop the offending medication (see ABCDE's above)

-   Aggressive electrolyte repletion (K and Mg especially)

-   Serial EKG monitoring ± monitor on telemetry

-   If offending medication is needed, think of alternatives regimens
    (zofran 🡪 scopolamine patch/alcohol wipe sniff; neutropenic ppx
    LVQ/fluconazole 🡪 cefdinir/micafungin, etc.)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   If unstable:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   ABCs, follow ACLS protocol, and empiric IV magnesium

-   If drug induced, contact Cardiology for overdrive pacing as IV
    magnesium does not work

Brown Recluse Bites (Loxoscelism) -- Ashley Zeoli

Background

-   The brown recluse (Loxoceles genus) is widespread in the South,
    West, and Midwest US

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Found in homes (attics, basements, cupboards) and outdoors (rock
    piles, under tree bark)

-   Their numbers increase in association with humans (i.e.
    synanthropic)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Appearance/identification

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Three pairs of eyes, a monochromatic abdomen and legs, and very fine
    hairs on its legs

-   Using the "violin" pattern on its body is a poor way to identify
    this spider, as other harmless spiders can have similar markings.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Loxocelism is the medical manifestation of the brown recluse spider
    bite

-   Venom contains insecticidal toxins, metalloproteases, and
    phospholipases

Presentation

-   Bites are most common on the upper arm, thorax, or inner thigh

-   Local signs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sometimes painless, but can cause burning sensation with two small
    cutaneous puncture marks with surrounding erythema. Pain can
    increase over the first 8 hours

-   Usually appears as a red plaque or papule with central pallor and
    can sometimes present with vesiculation

-   Usually self-resolves in 1 week

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Skin necrosis

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   In some, skin lesion can progress to necrosis overall several days

-   An eschar will form that eventually ulcerates. The ulcerative base
    often has a yellow stringy material that is not pus or infection

-   Usually will heal over several weeks to months

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Systemic signs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The degree of systemic effects does not correlate with the
    appearance of the bite

-   Symptoms may develop over several days, and include nausea,
    vomiting, fever, rhabdomyolysis, malaise, acute hemolytic anemia,
    significant swelling from head/neck bites that can compromise the
    airway, DIC and renal failure

Evaluation

-   Presumptive diagnosis is based clinical presentation of the
    bite/wound

-   DDx includes vasculitis, pyoderma gangrenosum, cellulitis, or other
    arthropod bites

-   Definitive diagnosis is based upon observing a spider bite in
    combination identification by an entomologist. There is an assay for
    Loxoceles venom, but it is not commercially available

-   Pts with local symptoms do not need any further workup

-   Pt with any systemic symptoms require lab evaluation for more
    serious disease

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   CBC, UA to eval for blood, CMP, CK

-   If anemia: Type and Screen, peripheral smear, reti, LDH,
    haptoglobin, coags

Management

-   Local signs: wound care (soap/water, elevation), pain management,
    tetanus vaccine/prophylaxis if indicated, antibiotics only if signs
    of concurrent cellulitis

-   Skin necrosis: symptomatic and supportive care; infection rare

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Surgery can worsen cosmetic outcomes and is rarely indicated in the
    acute care setting. Skin grafting is occasionally needed for a very
    large ulcerative wound that is not healing.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Systemic signs

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Consult Toxicology

-   Hemolytic anemia: transfuse for Hgb \<10 + consult Heme

-   Rhabdomyolysis: LR for UOP \>200-300cc/hr

-   If pt develops chest pain, obtain EKG and check a troponin; if
    either is abnormal obtain echo and call Toxicology; heart effects
    (e.g. myocarditis) seen at VUMC

-   DIC: supportive care

    ![Diagram Description automatically
    generated](media/image67.png){width="5.2552438757655295in"
    height="2.7424551618547683in"}

Appendices

Editor: Kate Heckman

Faculty Editor: Garren Montgomery, MD

Uploading Records to EPIC

-   Request outside records to your Doximity account fax

-   Open Doximity in Epic virtual desktop browser window (internet
    explorer)

-   Open faxed documents, and save your document as PDF to desktop of
    the virtual desktop

-   Click the \"Epic\" dropdown menu (the same one where you \"Change
    Context\")

-   Hover over "Pt Care" than click \"Media Manager\" (pin to avoid
    extra clicks next time)

-   Select your pt

-   Click \"Scan;\" a popup window will appear

-   On the popup window, click \"File\" \> \"Import File\"

-   In the bottom right-hand corner, change the file type from \"Image
    Files\" to \"PDF Files\"

-   Search for your saved document under \"Downloads\" or "Desktop" and
    select \"Open\"

-   The documents should appear in the popup window. On the right-hand
    side, under \"Store Images As:\" scroll down and select \"Outside
    Medical Records\"

-   Click \"Upload Images;\" name them as you choose

VUMC: Vanderbilt University Medical Center Rotations

General Internal Medicine

Morgan (1 -- 6)

-   Team: 1 Res, 1 Intern with pt cap of 10

-   Pagers: Morgan 1: 831-4765, Morgan 2: 831-4766, Morgan 3: 831-4767,
    Morgan 4: 831-4768, Morgan 5: 831-8481, Morgan 6: 831-4781

-   Pick up list at 6 AM in res library on 8N (code 431), admit until
    5:30 PM, sign-out 6 PM

-   Admitting: Teams 1-3-5 & 2-4-6 alternate admitting days (just like
    VA)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-admitting teams can sign out once their work is complete as
    early as 2PM on weekdays and 12PM on weekends

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Rounding time and meeting location varies by attending (typically
    between 7 to 8 AM)

-   Work room: team-specific rooms labelled on hall behind 7N Nursing
    station (Code 24300)

-   Tips: get pharmacist\'s phone number 1st day, get case
    management/social work phone numbers, place consults as soon as
    possible (preferably before rounds once consult teams arrive at 7
    AM)

Geriatrics

-   Team: 1 Res, 1 Intern with pt cap of 10

-   Rounds at 8 AM, team meets in the Round Wing workroom

-   Work room: 7434

Rogers (Subspecialty Services)

All Rogers services

-   Team: 1 Res, 1 Intern with pt cap of 10

-   Pick up list at 6 AM, admit daily until 5:30 PM, sign-out 6 PM

-   Each HPI usually requires special info about the pt's subspecialty
    diagnosis; refer to primer documents that are available for most
    subspecialty services in the chief\'s \"welcome to the wards\"
    email, and see tips below

Rogers Hepatology

-   Rounds typically at 8 AM, team meets on 6MCE

-   Pager: 831-4782

-   Work room: 6MCE, room 6755 near the elevators (no code)

-   Review: Hepatology Section, Paracentesis (Procedures), and
    \'Surviving Rogers Hep\' primer

-   Tips: structure one-liner as "cirrhosis secondary to \_\_\_
    decompensated by \_\_\_ (EV bleed, ascites, SBP, HE, or HRS) who
    follows with \_\_\_ (hepatologist) and is \_\_\_ (listed /
    undergoing workup for / not listed) for transplant"; know pt MELD-Na
    scores (use the MELD-Na dot phrase or pt list column); anticipate at
    least diagnostic paracentesis on admission if any concern for SBP
    (abdominal pain, AMS, etc.)

Rogers ID

-   Rounds typically at 8 AM, team meets in Resident Library (8N)

-   Pager: 831-4779

-   Work room: 6 Round Wing, 2nd door on left after coming out of
    elevator (no code)

-   Tips: Each HPI for pt with HIV should include most recent CCC
    provider, CD4/Viral Load, prior AIDS-defining illnesses and
    compliance to ART; Use 'Notifications' tab on main screen in Epic to
    keep track of lab orders as pts can have long stays with send-out
    labs that can take up to two weeks to result (can also hit 'Notify
    Me' in dropdown box of Order)

Rogers Pulmonology

-   Rounds typically at 8 AM, team meets at 8N nursing station

-   Pager: 831-4777

-   Work room: 8 South 8216 (code 2430)

-   Tips: Each HPI should include most recent PFTs (FEV1% most
    important, include other relevant data or recent changes); For CF,
    Use the CF admission order set, know typical organisms in pt's
    sputum (ex: MDR Pseudomonas, Burkholderia, MRSA) and consult CF
    team; for PH know the therapies they are on (typically Flolan or
    Veletri)

Rogers Renal

-   Rounds typically start 7-7:30 AM, team meets at resident/fellow work
    room on 6MCE

-   Pager: 831-4783

-   Work room: 6MCE 6772, behind nursing station with renal fellows (no
    code)

-   Tips: Each HPI should have renal transplant history with year, type
    of transplant, PRA, Ag MM, CMV D/R; 6MCE charge nurse can get pts
    transferred there; alert the night cross-cover resident to pts with
    recent renal biopsy and low threshold to contact renal fellow;
    transplant pts should have daily tacro level one hour before AM
    tacro dose (5:00 am), regardless of pt's home schedule and be
    cautious with first dose timing of immunosuppression to keep on
    schedule

Cardiology Services (CHF, Harrison, and CCU)

CHF - Heart Failure (1 & 2)

-   Team: 1 Res, 2 Interns on one team with pt cap of 8 per intern (16
    total)

-   Pagers: CHF-A: 831-6485, CHF-B: 831-6486

-   Pick up list at 6 AM, admit daily until 5PM (alternate admissions,
    resident to help assign)

-   Rounds typically at 7 AM, team meets at 7MCE nursing station

-   Workroom: 7N room 7024 right before bridge to 7MCE (code 145)

-   Tips: Know each pt's dry weight (usually found in outpt cards notes
    or at last discharge), know current outpt diuretic regimen, know
    most recent TTE, RHC, and LHC results (keep this info accessible on
    rounds), order strict I&Os; Daily Standing Weights, and fluid
    restriction of 2L/day, obtain iron studies to assess need for IV
    iron, perform volume exams on pts before rounds

Harrison (1 & 2)

-   Team: 1 Res, 1 Intern on each team with pt cap of 10

-   Pagers: Harrison 1: 831-4769, Harrison 2: 831-4770

-   Pick up list at 6 AM, admit until 5 PM (Long) or 2 PM (Short)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Alternate long and short days with other Harrison team

-   Weekends: Only long team admits new pts

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Rounds typically at 7 AM, team meets at 7MCE Nursing station

-   Work room: 7MCE (no code)

-   Tips: To order heart cath, must be in the cardiology context in Epic
    "VUMC Cardiology VIR" (order listed as "Case Request Cath Lab" and
    use provider "Surgeon, Generic")

CCU

-   Team: 3 Res, dedicated cards fellow, no specific pt cap

-   Pager: 831-6487

-   Rounds start at 7 AM on 5N with Interventional rounds, then Advanced
    Heart Failure rounds

-   Call room: 5229AA, on 5S behind the nursing station (code 1234#)

-   Supply room: on 5N (code 512), equipment/US room: on 5N (code 512)

-   Tips: make sure you have access to the Swan sheet folder, have
    someone show you how to fill in Swan numbers, make a new Swan
    document daily, make a schedule so you stay on top of q4h Swan
    numbers and frequent I/O assessments, familiarize yourself with IABP
    monitors and Impella care, have pre-call update any hospital courses
    the post-call resident wasn\'t able to do since post-call is busy
    presenting on rounds

Hematology (Brittingham) & Oncology

Hematology (Brittingham)

-   Team: 1 Res, 2 Interns with pt cap of 8 per intern (16 total)

-   Pagers: Brittingham 1: 831-4785, Brittingham 2: 831-4788

-   Pick up list at 6 AM, admit daily until 5 PM (alternate admissions
    between interns)

-   Rounds at 8 AM, team meets on 10T

-   Work room: 7MCE conference room (code 0701)

-   Tips: Each HPI should include malignancy history (dx, prior tx,
    current tx), utilize the \'treatment\' tab to keep on track with
    chemo cycle/day, know the febrile neutropenia algorithm, if
    possible, enter orders/write notes while the other intern and
    attending are at bedside, low threshold to work any complaints up as
    bleeds, infections, and fevers are common and can be rapidly lethal

Oncology (A & B)

-   Team: 1 Res, 1 Intern on each team with pt cap of 10

-   Pagers: Oncology A: 831-4786, Oncology B: 831-4787

-   Pick up list at 6 AM, admit daily until 5 PM, sign-out 6 PM

-   Rounds at 8 AM, team meets on 11N at nursing station

-   Workroom: Varied; typically resident library, 11N or 10T, or 7MCE
    Conference room

-   Tips: Each HPI should have Onc history (Dot Phrase ".onchist")
    including dx, prior treatments, most recent imaging; 10T and 11N
    charge nurse can get pts transferred there, know that pts admitted
    from infusion clinic must be seen and have orders placed (write
    delayed admission orders in advance of their arrival to floor bed)

VU MICU

-   Team: 3 Res, 3 Interns, no specific pt cap

-   Pagers: MICU 1 Intern Pager: 831-4759, MICU 2 Intern Pager:
    831-4757. Need to also carry the team phone

-   Day Intern: 8 AM - 10 PM; Night Intern 9 PM - 11 AM

-   Rounds at 8 AM (start with half hour teaching most days)

-   Work areas: team 1 sits at computers across from pt room 8641; team
    2 sits at computers across from pt room 8613; ultrasound/equipment
    room code is 4321\*; break room code 4321

-   Tips: Day 1, figure out if you\'re the code team and where the I/O
    kit is. Night intern presents all the old pts in the morning and
    signs the notes. The day intern owns the A&P of the notes by keeping
    them updated. Trust the nurses and never hesitate to relay info to
    your resident overnight if you're concerned (wake him/her up!)

VU Nights

-   Start on Sunday night for interns, Wednesday night for residents;
    off Saturday night

-   Team: 1 Res, 2 Interns with pt cap of 10 for Morgan/Rogers
    admitting; 1 Res + 1 Intern w/ cap of 10 for Harrison/Heme/Onc (Res
    and Intern split admissions)

-   Harrison/Heme/Onc: Start at 6 PM, admit until 5 AM, sign-out by 6 AM

-   Morgan/Rogers: Start at 6:30 PM, admit until 5:30 AM, sign-out by
    6:30 AM

-   Cross cover: Start at 6 PM (Be on time!), sign-out 6:30 AM

-   Tips: ensure you communicate all orders and plans with the resident,
    writing "To do" boxes on the first pages of each printed H&P might
    help you communicate the important aspects of each plan to the day
    intern when they arrive the next morning, cafeteria closes at 2 AM.
    For cross cover, make sure to document any significant events in
    Epic. Useful to follow-up on pts admitted previous nights to reflect
    on your diagnosis and workups.

VA: Veterans Affairs Rotations

VA General Wards (1A -- 6B)

-   Always make sure that your VA login works a few days before you are
    scheduled to start!

-   Team: 1 Res, 2 Interns with soft pt cap of 8 each (16 total)

-   Pagers: See VA Phone/Pager Directory Section for pager numbers

-   Pick up list by 6:30 AM In the pulm/ID fellows workroom on the 2nd
    floor (between team 4 workroom and the MICU), sign-out at 6 PM

-   Admitting: Teams 1-3-5 & 2-4-6 alternate admitting days and admit
    until 5:30 PM

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Non-admitting teams can sign out once their work Is complete as
    early as 2PM on weekdays and 12PM on weekends

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Rounds alternate at 7 AM on admitting days, 8 AM on non-admitting
    days, meet at workrooms; night admitting team presents to attendings
    at 7 AM (depending on team)

-   Work rooms:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Team 1 on 2N hallway, past RN station

-   Team 2 on 2N hallway, past RN station

-   Team 3 on 2N hallway, between main elevators and RN station

-   Team 4 at 2nd floor adjacent to main elevators

-   Team 5 on 3N hallway

-   Team 6 in pulm & ID fellow workroom outside MICU on 2G

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Tips: Admission days can be very busy and anything you can get done
    on the non-admitting days will make your life easier (ex: DIPNs).
    Ensure that you tag PCP on EVERY H&P so they know pt is admitted
    (right click signed H&P -\> dropdown menu -\> \"identify additional
    co-signer\"), make documents in OneDrive (it\'s HIPAA-compliant!) to
    use as your pre-rounding sheet and sign-out sheet and share these
    with your team (for days off); roll your pagers via Vanderbilt
    operator (same as at VU); ensure all orders on pts still in the ED
    are "delayed" or they will disappear once on the floor (ask your
    resident); all consults must be accompanied by page to the covering
    fellow (use Synergy for medicine subspecialties consult schedule,
    TVHS website for surgery/other), beware that medications disappear
    after 1 month of admission (your pharmacist can help!), beware that
    diets disappear when converting obs to inpt, enjoy a complimentary
    VA square!

VA MICU

-   Team: 3 Res, 3 Interns, no specific pt cap

-   Combined CCU and MICU; 7AM CCU rounds followed by 8AM MICU rounds

-   Day Intern: 7 AM - 9 PM; Night Intern 8 PM - 10 AM; MICU between 2N
    and 2G (2nd floor)

-   Tips: Night intern presents all of the old pts in the morning and
    signs the notes. The day intern owns the A&P of the notes by keeping
    them updated. Never hesitate to relay information to your resident
    overnight if you are concerned (wake him/her up!)

VA Nights

-   Team: 1 Res, 2 Interns, total of 10 admissions overnight

-   Pager: NIGHT ADMIT RESIDENT must roll the night admitting pager
    317-0227

-   Start at 7 PM, Admit until 5 AM, present new pts to teams at 7 AM,
    leave by 8 AM

-   Start Sunday night for interns, Wednesday night for residents; off
    day is Saturday night for interns/cross-cover resident (covered by
    clinic resident), Friday night for admitting resident (covered by
    BMT resident)

-   Tips: Admissions typically bolus at the start of shift and slow
    later in the night, so worry about seeing pts, formulating plans
    with resident and putting in orders first as notes can be finished
    once it slows down, cafeteria at VU closes at 2 AM, communicate
    everything you do with your resident who is supervising a second
    intern as well, ensure all orders on pts still in the ED are
    "delayed" or they will disappear once on the floor (ask your
    resident), engage the VA night hospitalist if there is any questions
    with triage, codes, etc, enjoy a complimentary VA square for
    breakfast!

How to Discharge a Pt at VUMC

-   Verify the correct pharmacy with the pt (Vanderbilt MCE pharmacy if
    using meds-to-beds) and if refills of existing medications are
    needed

-   Select 'Transfer-Discharge' on the navigator panel on eStar🡪 select
    'Discharge' tab on the top of the page

-   Select 'Rx Routing' on the left panel. Choose one of the three
    options. This choice will set the default prescribing choice for new
    medications at discharge or refilled medications. This can be
    changed manually within each Rx order

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Default = will e-prescribe to pt's pharmacy

-   Print = will print all Rx's and not e-prescribe (printed to nursing
    station on pt's floor)

-   Do not print and do not e-prescribe (This is used for pt going to
    SNF or IPR)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Select 'Discharge Orders' on the left panel. This will open a
    reconciliation navigator

-   Reconcile the home medications with the current inpt medications.
    The red tab on the right side of the screen will become green when
    all medications are addressed

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   For new medications or refills, make sure the 'Class' in the
    prescription is set to 'Normal' for electronic prescriptions.
    Otherwise, to add the medication to the list without a prescription,
    choose 'No Print'

-   The medications will e-prescribe to the pharmacy selected at the
    bottom of the order panel on the right side of your screen

-   To send to multiple pharmacies, select the primary pharmacy at the
    bottom of the order panel on the right side of your screen, then
    choose 'Send to Multiple Pharmacies'

-   Note that meds-to-beds will arrange to deliver meds AFTER the
    \"discharge\" order is signed; if discharge is time-sensitive, can
    call to ask if meds can be delivered in advance

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Next, select 'Order Sets' at the top of the Discharge Orders panel

-   In the order box on the right, type "Adult General Discharge"

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Right-click on the option and select "Add to Favorites". Now, this
    option will be available on the Order Set page for future pts.

-   Open Adult General Discharge order set

    -   Select the appropriate choices pertinent to current pt

        -   For SNF/LTC, include RN orders like diet, activity
            order/restriction, wound care, etc.

    -   On the right side of the screen, you can add Ad Hoc orders such
        as

        -   Hospital Follow-up with \"X\" service (place these as soon
            as you know!)

        -   Ambulatory Referrals

        -   Post-discharge labs

        -   \*Important for ID labs in addition to INR checks, place fax
            number for which provider that will be following up results
            in the comments section. If labs will be done outside of
            Vanderbilt system, must select \"External Non-VMG\"

        -   Medications not listed on reconciliation list

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   When all sections are completed, click 'Sign -- Print and/or
    E-prescribe Now'

-   Select 'Follow-up Providers' on the left panel.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Select the providers that you want to receive the discharge summary.

    Provide personal instructions to the pt

-   Select 'Instructions' on the left-hand panel

-   Free-text your personal comments and instructions to the pt, such
    as:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   A simple statement for why the pt was admitted

-   Changes made to pt's medications that you feel are important to
    highlight

-   Home instructions (daily weights, diet changes, wound care, etc)

-   Key follow-up plans (main appointments, labs, or tests)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   This section appears FIRST in the pt's printed AVS

How to Discharge a Pt at VA

Complete the following steps in this order to ensure info will be
accurately reflected on the DIPN.

-   Medication reconciliation

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The list of outpt medications at the end of your reconciliation is
    the final medication discharge list.

-   In the medication tab, transfer new inpt medications to the outpt
    medication list by right-clicking and select 'Transfer'

-   Select "Pick up at window," as this will ensure the pt will have the
    medication prior to leaving the hospital

-   Order new supplies (wound care, tube feeds, etc) by placing new
    outpt \"med\" order

-   Review the existing outpt medications to determine if they need to
    be continued and if the pt has an adequate supply at home - refill
    meds if necessary

-   Discontinue any outpt medications that you do not want the pt to
    continue taking. Right-click and select 'Discontinue'

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Return to clinic (Primary care)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Critical to tag PCP on discharge summary to ensure they are alerted
    to hospital stay. Can also tag consultants and office coordinators
    (RNs) can be cc'd to DC summary by resident

-   For PCP follow-up, no longer need to place an RTC, will be
    coordinated by PACT on the clinic side

-   Ask VA Inpt Chief for \"welcome to VA wards\" info with instructions
    to place subspecialty hospital follow up appts, as there is
    variation (page fellow vs e-consult vs RTC)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Complete DIPN

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The DIPN contains all of the discharge instructions

-   Start a new note and select 'DIPN' template. This will open a
    pre-templated note - follow the prompts and select finish. All
    sections need to be addressed to proceed.

-   Discharge related orders will generate after you finish the DIPN
    prompts, which includes vaccinations, removing IV, removing Foley
    catheter, etc.

-   The DIPN is valid for 24 hrs; thus the DIPN may be pre-signed one
    day prior. If DIPN is pre-signed, final changes to pt instructions
    and medications need to be addended.

-   \[Optional but strongly recommended\] Provide personal instructions
    to the pt at the top of the DIPN (coach your interns to do this!),
    such as:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   A simple statement for why the pt was admitted

-   Changes made to pt's medications that you feel are important to
    highlight

-   Home instructions (daily weights, diet changes, wound care, etc)

-   Key follow-up plans (main appointments, labs, or tests)

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Sign the DFF (discharge from facility) order

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   The DFF order is found under the "Discharge Orders" tab in CPRS
    orders

-   Once all steps are completed, DFF can be signed and pt will be
    discharged from facility

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
-   Discharge summary: right click 🡪 dropdown menu 🡪 \"identify
    additional cosigner\" 🡪 ALWAYS add the pt\'s PCP, may add other
    consultants or subspecialists for continuity

VUMC and VA Door Codes and Ultrasound Locations

**VUMC**

Resident Library -- 431

Morgan Team Rooms -- 24300

Brittingham -- 0701\*

Rogers Pulm -- 2430

GME Lounge -- 215

7MCE Conference Room -- 4321

CHF Room -- 145

CCU Resident Call Room -- 1234#

CCU Equipment Room -- 123

CCU Supply Room for US -- 512

MICU Resident Call Room -- 2430\*

MICU Break Room -- 4321

MICU Supply Room for US -- 4321#

11N Supply Room -- 123

8South Supply Room -- 512

GME Resident Lounge (TVC, 2806) -- 215

Many door entries at VUMC -- 016 or 0160

**VUMC US Locations**

8N behind RN station

8S, in supply closet to the left as you walk towards nursing station
(door code 1-3-5)

6MCE behind RN station

5^th^ floor round wing, ask nurses

Please don\'t take MICU or CCU ultrasounds off the units!

**VA**

Team Rooms -- 531

Richard Frances Conference Room -- code is written above the door

VA Supply rooms -- 541. VA MICU Supply Room -- 541#

**VA Ultrasound Location**

Internal Medicine office suite on 2G, in the hospitalist work room
(across hall from chief office) - the hospitalist on call can unlock if
needed. Please don\'t take MICU ultrasound off the unit!

VUMC Phone and Pager Directory -- From Ben Boone's QI Project

**FedEx \#**: 2008-1658-7

**Shorthand**

1xxxx -- 615-421-xxxx

2xxxx -- 615-322-xxxx

3xxxx -- 615-343-xxxx

5xxxx -- 615-875-xxxx

6xxxx -- 615-936-xxxx

**Labs**

Blood Bank -- 22233

Cytology Lab -- 22721

Flow Cytometry Lab -- 39081

Hematology Lab -- 39125

Hematology Smear Lab -- 33905

Lab Operator -- 55227

Microbiology Lab -- 23406

**Cardiology**

Cardiac Access Center -- 33255

Cardiac MRI -- 68111

Cath Lab -- 34808

Echo Lab -- 20624

Echo Reading Room -- 60705

EP Lab -- 35036

TEE -- 67431

Telemetry -- 65945

**Units**

A Pod -- 35914

B Pod -- 27173

C Pod -- 20116

G Pod -- 50607

TCU -- 34893

3 Round Wing -- 25120

4 North -- 22255

4 Round Wing -- 22244

4 South -- 32736

5 North -- 35030

5 Round Wing -- 23895

5 South -- 24710

6 MCE -- 20910

6 North -- 32482

6 Round Wing -- 28900

6 South -- 22000

6 Tower -- 35232

7 MCE - 56801

7 North -- 20942

7 Round Wing -- 35302

7 South -- 32271

7 Tower -- 20911

8 MCE -- 53700

8 North -- 20948

8 South -- 20946

8 Tower -- 20938

9 North -- 20918

9 South -- 20916

9 Tower -- 20988

10 North -- 30398

10 South -- 28920

10 Tower -- 24545

11 North -- 55333

11 South -- 24590

**Radiology**

Body Reading Room -- 26011

Chest Reading Room -- 28485

CT Scanner A Pod -- 36055

CT Tech -- 38074

CTA Reading Room -- 32162

ED Reading Room -- 37185

Fluoroscopy Reading Room -- 30951

Fluoroscopy Tech -- 20878

IR Reading Room -- 20840

MRI Tech -- 34557

Nuclear Med Reading Room -- 31577

Nuclear Med Tech -- 20893

Neuroradiology Reading Room -- 30900

PET Reading Room -- 37523

Radiology Library -- 20866

Ultrasound Reading Room -- 20853

Ultrasound Tech -- 34970

Vascular Lab -- 39205

X-ray Tech ED -- 28804

X-ray Tech Floor Pager -- 615-835-5647

X-ray Tech Tower Pager -- 615-835-5597

**Miscellaneous**

Admitting -- 30179

Anesthesia STAT Phone -- 615-887-7369

Bed Management (Option 5) -- 54000

Bronchoscopy Lab -- 39647

Dialysis -- 20912

EEG Tech Pager -- 615-835-8847

GI Lab -- 39716

Inpt Pharmacy -- 56337

Language Line -- (866) 874-3972 (218443)

Meds to Beds / Discharge Pharmacy -- 20804

Nutrition Services -- 39761

PICC Service -- 22772

Resident Library -- 56205

Service Center -- 39600

The MAC -- 615-540-4213

Transfer Center (Option 4) -- 54000

Vanderbilt Operator -- 615-322-5000 or 0

**Vanderbilt Inpt Team Pagers**

Brittingham (Heme) 1: 831-4785

Brittingham (Heme) 2: 831-4788

CHF-A: 831-6485

CHF-B: 831-6486

Harrison 1: 831-4769

Harrison 2: 831-4770

Morgan 1: 831-4765

Morgan 2: 831-4766

Morgan 3: 831-4767

Morgan 4: 831-4768

Morgan 5: 831-8481

Morgan 6: 831-4781

Oncology A: 831-4786

Oncology B: 831-4787

Rogers Hepatology: 831-4782

Rogers ID: 831-4779

Rogers Pulmonary: 831-4777

Rogers Renal: 831-4783

MICU 1 Intern Pager: 831-4759

MICU 2 Intern Pager: 831-4757

CCU Pager: 831-6487

Chief-On-Call Pager: 831-6489

**Neurology Pagers**

831-4790 -- Page this to discuss a pt admitted to the neurology general
service

831-4792 -- Page this to discuss a pt admitted to the neurology stroke
service

835-5137 -- Page this for any neurology issues/questions at the
Nashville VA

831-4793 -- Page this to for any other neurology question (When in
doubt, pager this #)

VA Phone and Pager Directory

**Administrative Numbers:**

AOD: 67010

NOD: 615-456-0362

Flow coordinator: 615-712-5316

Transfer coordinator: 22516 (6:30a-4:45p), 615-225-4725

IT Help Desk: 26500, 615-225-6500; local IT = 1-855-673-4357

**VA Triage/ER:**

MD areas: 67990/ 66892/ 67173/ 68192/ 68199

**Resident Team Work Rooms:**

Team 1: 68628/ 67147/ 66091

Team 2: 67146/ 68128/ 66090

Team 3: 66088/ 66089/ 66087

Team 4: 67662/ 68637/ 66081

Team 5: 66826/ 68427/ 66563

Team 6 (2G ID/Pulm Room): 68687/ 67115/ 68696/ 68167

BMT: 67976, 67977

MICU/CCU: 67599

**Hospital Unit Ward Clerks:**

Vocera: 66480

2N: 68030

3N: 68040

2G: 68010

MICU/CCU: 67470

SICU: 67930

PACU: 67746, 67747

Dialysis: 66860, 68132

VA triage charge RN: 66849, 67990

2N Fax: 615-873-8021

3N Fax: 615-873-8051

MICU Fax: 615-873-8161

**VA Consult Team Numbers**: (p= pager)

Addiction Tx Services (ATS): Angela Burcham (p) 317-1751, x26363; alt
(p) 317-1359, x67870

Anesthesia Service (p): 615-317-3222

Cardiac Surgery: look on VA website; OR Bo Mistak NP (p): 831-4101,
Sherry PA (p): 317-4192

Cardiology (p): 317-0520

Dermatology (p): 317-1683 (days) or 835-8620 (nights)

Endocrine (p): 835-5232

ENT: look on VA website

GI (p): 831-4711

Geriatrics (p): 317-1282, 317-3046

General Surgery (p): 835-7338

Hepatology transplant (Dr. Awad's pager): 835-4967

IR: 68552 (call 1st before placing orders)

Nephrology (p): 835-9945

Neurology (p): 835-5137

Neurosurgery: look on VA website

Ophthalmology: call eye clinic 67279 (7a-5p): Night/weekend ONLY (p):
831-4433

Oral Surgery (p): 317-0571

Orthopedic Surgery: look on VA website

Palliative Care (p): 317-3040

Podiatry: 68425 (RN, 1st call)

Plastic Surgery: look on VA website

Psychiatry (p): 317-1506 (1st call); Emergencies/2nd call: 615-476-9004
or 615-476-1341

Thoracic Surgery: look on VA website, or page Pinkerman NP (p): 317-3138

Urologic Surgery (p): 831-8038

Vascular Surgery (p): 835-7358

**Other VA Services:**

Anti-coagulation Clinic: 66772

Audiology Clinic (same as outpt SLP): 67310

Blood Bank: 67025 (supervisor at 67029)

Cardiology Services

\- Cath lab: 68057, 68283, 68325, 68358

\- Echo: 67982 (66705 for reading room)

\- Heart station (including EKG's): 67370/ 66025

\- Stress test results: 66811 (nuc med reading room)

\- Stress test lab: 67982

Chaplain: 66983

Community Health: Patricia Elliott 615-225-3799, Myra Golden
615-225-3802

Dental Clinic: 67120

Derm Clinic: 67130

Diabetes Educator: 67518, (p) 317-3210

Dietary: 66996

EMG: 67450

EEG: 67300

GI lab: 67240

Housekeeping/Environmental Services: 67198, 68689

Home Oxygen: 68402

Infection Control: 66759

Infusion Clinic: 67318

Lab:

\- Chemistry: 67004

\- Hematology/Serology/Coag/Urine: 67045, 66948

\- Microbiology: 67049, 67051 (supervisor at 66982)

\- Specimen processing: 66975

\- Cytology: 67062, 67063

\- Surgical pathology: 67064

\- Hematopathology: 68588

Logistics: 68747/ 68748

Medical Records: 67830

Nutrition Consult:

\- 2N, MICU: 66730

\- 3N, SICU: 67471

\- 2G, PCU: 67613

Occupational Therapy, Inpt: 67560

Pain Clinic: 67003

Palliative: 66773 or (p) 428-7832

Phlebotomy: 67397

Pharmacy

\- Inpt: 67660

\- Outpt: 67680

\- Discharge: 66093

\- 2N med rec room: 66093

\- 3N med rec room: 68223

Physical Therapy (inpt): 67690

PICC (3rd party ePICC): alert charge RN PICC order placed; NOD calls
PICC company to place it 24/7

Police: 67740

Prosthetics: 67770, 67760

Pulmonary Function Tests (PFT): 67780, 67310 or weekdays (9A-3P)
636-675-3060

Radiology

\- Main line: 67810 (call here to be directed to radiology reading
rooms); 68811

\- Angio/IR: 68552

\- Fluoro: 67271

\- XR: 67810

\- CT: 67007, 68449

\- MRI: 66366

\- Nuclear Medicine: 67550, 66813

\- PET: 67615

\- Ultrasound: 67550

\- VetMED (after hours reads): 1-844-VMG-RADS (864-7237) or 646-827-9492

Respiratory Therapy:

\- Wards: 615-651-3939 (supervisor at 651-3583)

\- MICU: 615-651-9923

Social work: varies per team (weekday); Deb Flowers 615-289-3722
(weekend)

Speech pathology: 67193 (back room), 67970 (clinic front desk)

Telemetry: 67377

TPN: 67164

Wound Care: 66126, or call general surgery

**Nashville VA Team Pager Numbers**

Team 1 Resident: 317-1303

Team 1 Intern A: 317-1201

Team 1 Intern B: 317-1205

Team 2 Resident: 317-1245

Team 2 Intern A: 317-1207

Team 2 Intern B: 317-1209

Team 3 Resident: 317-1304

Team 3 Intern A: 317-1213

Team 3 Intern B: 317-1206

Team 4 Resident: 317-1307

Team 4 Intern A: 317-1225

Team 4 Intern B: 317-1226

Team 5 Resident: 317-1261

Team 5 Intern A: 317-1216

Team 5 Intern B: 317-1144

Team 6 Resident: 317-1210

Team 6 Intern A: 317-1223

Team 6 Intern B: 317-1150

Night Admit Resident: 317-0227

BMT Resident: 317-014
